Edition of 1905. See also Manufacturing on Wikipedia ; and the disclaimer .

​ MANUFACTURES (ML. manufactura , from 
Lat. manufactus , manu factus , made by hand, 
from manu , abl. sg. of manus , hand, and factus , 
p.p. of facere , to make). In a broad sense of the 
term, manufactures are such forms of industry 
as elaborate for economic use materials which 
are themselves the product of industry.
Manufactures are thus distinguished from extractive 
industry, which procures wealth from nature in 
its primary forms. In practice it is difficult to 
draw a hard and fast line between these two 
types of industry, since many commodities which 
are commonly classed as raw materials have been 
subject to one or more elaborative processes, as, 
for example, raw cotton, raw sugar, pig iron. 
The practice of American statisticians is to class 
with extractive industry processes which are
directly connected with the exploitation of natural 
products. Butter and cheese which are made on 
the farm are treated as agricultural products; 
when produced in factories distinct from the 
farm they are classed with manufactures. A 
product in its earliest merchantable form may 
then be classed with raw materials; when
subjected to further processes of elaboration it
becomes a manufactured commodity. For the
technical legal distinction in this matter, see Manufactured Article .

Again, many commodities undergo minor 
changes incidental to consumption. The
preparation of food may be cited as a case in point. 
Such processes are not usually placed under 
manufactures. If the preparation of food is 
carried on in separate establishments with a 
view to supplying a market, it will fall under 
the head of manufactures. This distinction is 
obviously difficult to make in practice. The 
twelfth census of the United States excludes 
from manufactures proper most forms of order 
production, confining the term to production of 
standard commodities for a general market. 
From a theoretical point of view, however, it is 
better to include under manufactures all
processes
of elaboration of merchantable materials 
into commodities primarily designed for sale.

In this sense of the term manufactures
presuppose a considerably developed economic life. 
They did not exist when each household produced 
exclusively for its own consumption. In Western
Europe they were first carried on under the guilds (q.v.). forming, however, but an insignificant
part of the economic life. With the rise of 
capital in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 
manufactures were carried on more extensively 
under the domestic system. The capitalist-merchant
put out materials to be worked up at home 
by workmen whose chief occupation was usually 
agriculture. This form of manufacture still
exists in America and England; it is widely
practiced in France, Germany, and Russia; and in 
some European districts, notably in Norway, it 
is the prevalent form.

In the more advanced nations domestic
manufacture has been largely supplanted by the factory system (q.v.). The extension of the market 
in early modern times, requiring a vastly
increased production of goods of standard kinds, 
led first to excessive division of labor and later 
to the invention of machinery. The first
industries to respond to these influences were the 
textile and the iron industries as discussed in 
detail under the heads of Textile Manufacturing and Iron and Steel, Metallurgy of .

Manufactures in the United States . At 
the end of the colonial period manufacturing
industry in America was of slight importance. The 
principal salable articles were raw materials, 
such as the products of the forests. Each household
provided itself with the chief commodities 
for consumption. In New England, however, the 
manufacture of rum was extensive, and the
production of hats, coarse cloth, and nails was
carried on under the domestic system of industry. 
The total value of the manufactures of America at 
the time of the adoption of the Constitution has 
been estimated at $20,000,000; but this includes 
much domestic production for home consumption.

Machine production scarcely existed before 
1790. In that year a British mechanic, Slater, 
set up spinning machinery in Rhode Island. In 
1794 Whitney invented the cotton gin, thus
assuring a supply of raw materials for the new 
cotton manufacture. By 1810 machinery had 
been generally introduced in textile manufacture, 
although large quantities of goods were still 
produced under the older system. The value of 
textiles produced in that year was estimated at 
about $40,000,000.

The iron manufacture developed more slowly. 
Machinery of improved types was introduced in 
the first and second decades of the nineteenth 
century, but the greater part of the production 
and manufacture was carried on in a primitive 
fashion, until the fifth decade of the century, 
when anthracite began to be substituted for 
charcoal in smelting. From that time increase 
was rapid, as will be seen in the statistics given 
under Iron and Steel, Metallurgy of . 
The value of the manufactures of the United 
States for the year 1810 was estimated by Tench 
Coxe to be $198,613,471. In 1820 the value of 
manufactures had risen to $268,000,000. The 
following table, taken from the Twelfth Census, Manufactures, part i. , gives the essential facts 
as to the development of manufactures from 1850:

In estimating the economic significance of the 
development of manufactures as shown in the 
above table, it will be necessary to make allowance
for the fact that a considerable number 
of operations are now carried on as manufactures 
which formerly were a part of household industry.
The increase in the net product of
manufactures above cost of material is not wholly a 
net increase in national income, although the 
greater part may be so regarded. It is further 
to be kept in mind that the statistics of capital 
are based upon estimates which in the nature 
of the case are not very reliable.

The following table, taken from the Twelfth Census, Manufactures, part i. , shows the rank 
of the various States and Territories in gross 
value of manufactures:

The four States New York, Pennsylvania,
Illinois, and Massachusetts produce nearly
one-half the manufactures of the United States. The 
greatest concentration of manufacturing industry 
is in southern New England and New York and 
eastern Pennsylvania. But there appears to be 
a general tendency toward extension of the area 
of manufactures.

The United States occupies at present the foremost
rank as a manufacturing nation. The
successive stages by which it has reached this position
are illustrated by the following table, taken 
from the Twelfth Census, Manufactures, part i . 
(Mulhall's estimates):

Annual Value of Manufactures.

Bibliography . For the rise of manufactures 
in England, consult: Cunningham, Growth of English Industry (Cambridge, 1890-92), and 
Ashley, Economic History (London, 1888-93). 
For the growth of manufactures in America,
consult: Wright, Industrial Evolution of the United States (New York, 1897), and Wells, Recent Economic Changes (New York, 1898). 
Consult also the several censuses of the United 
States, particularly the Twelfth Census , and 
Mulhall's Dictionary of Statistics (London, 
1899), article “Manufactures.” See the separate 
articles on the various manufacturing industries, 
such as Cotton ; Iron and Steel ; Wool ; etc., 
which contain an historical sketch and statistics 
for each industry.