The Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT , / ˈ eɪ d ɒ t / ) is an Arizona state government agency charged with facilitating mobility within the state. In addition to managing the state's highway system , the agency is also involved with public transportation and municipal airports . The department was created in 1974 when the state merged the Arizona Highway Department with the Arizona Department of Aeronautics.

Jennifer Toth was appointed by Governor Katie Hobbs as the ADOT Director in January 2023. Former U.S. Secretary of Transportation Mary Peters had previously been a Director of ADOT. The past Federal Highway Administrator, Victor Mendez , was also previously a Director of ADOT.

ADOT's publications division publishes Arizona Highways magazine.

The Aeronautics Division, now a part of the Multimodal Planning Division, promotes aviation in the state, license aircraft dealers, assists in the development of public airport projects and manages Grand Canyon National Park Airport .

The Motor Vehicle Division (MVD) is responsible for driver licensing and vehicle registration. It has 1600 employees and an annual operating budget of $72 million. Currently it is headed by ADOT Assistant Director Eric Jorgensen.

As of FY 2023, the MVD has 7,969,576 license plates registered with the department.

The Enforcement and Compliance Division utilizes certified peace officers to enforce transportation related laws and regulations.

The Enforcement and Compliance Division was originally the enforcement component of the Motor Vehicle Division. Created in 2010 by former division Director, Terry Connor (retired Arizona DPS Commander), the Division separated from the Motor Vehicle Division to improve the enforcement capabilities of the department. Under current Division Director Tim Lane, the division continues to provide the state of Arizona a highly trained agency to protect Arizona's infrastructure. The Enforcement and Compliance Division has 3 separate units: the Enforcement Services Bureau, Office of Inspector General and the Executive Hearing Office.

The Enforcement Services Bureau (ESB) utilizes certified police officers to enforce state and federal commercial vehicle regulations. Stationed at Port of Entry stations, mobile scale teams and MVD offices, these officers are trained to perform a variety of duties and also enforce fuel tax laws. The Bureau also assists other state, local and federal agencies when needed.

The Office of Inspector General (OIG) utilizes detectives to deter theft, fraud and other crimes as well as assisting other state, local and federal agencies.

The Executive Hearing Office (EHO) employs an Administrative Law Judge and staff on driver license hearings and other administrative cases.

The Multimodal Planning Division (MPD) is the arm of ADOT involved in transportation planning. As its name suggests, the mandate for the MPD deals with creating plans for various modes of transport, including highways and public transit at both a regional and statewide level.

ADOT is noted for using pop-culture references to catch commuters eyes and deliver important safety tips on the electronic overhead signs. References have included Star Wars , Star Trek , and Pokémon Go . Signs have included: