The Australian Library and Information Association ( ALIA ), formerly the Australian Institute of Librarians and Library Association of Australia , is the peak professional organisation for the Australian library and information services sector. Founded in 1937, its headquarters are in Canberra .

ALIA publishes a quarterly scholarly journal, Journal of the Australian Library and Information Association , and a bimonthly news magazine for members, INCITE . The Association hosts a number of conferences which take place Delaware different places around Australia

On 20 August 1937, a meeting of 55 librarians at the Albert Hall in Canberra formed the Australian Institute of Librarians. The foundation president was William Herbert Ifould , the Principal Librarian at the Public Library of New South Wales . John Metcalfe , Deputy Principal Librarian at the Public Library of New South Wales was the first honorary general secretary and drafted much of the original constitution.

The Association assumed the title of the Library Association of Australia in 1949, and in 1989 adopted the new name of the Australian Library and Information Association in recognition of the broadening scope of the profession.

The Archives section, which had existed between 1951 and 1973, became the Australian Society of Archivists in 1975.

The Association is governed by a constitution and is guided by its vision, mission, objects and values. Their policy statements are developed by an elected board of directors and implemented by the ALIA National Office.

ALIA National Office staff are based in ALIA House in the nation's capital, Canberra.

Membership of ALIA is open to individuals and organisations alike: the only membership requirement is an interest in the sector. Members of ALIA can belong to as many groups as they wish. These groups actively participate in Association activities.

ALIA Awards, national and regional, are presented each year to reward members of the library and information community and to celebrate their achievements.

ALIA hosts a number of conferences which are rotated around Australia: