The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission is a scientific research organization of Bangladesh . Its main objective is to promote the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. It was established on 27 February 1973, after the independence of Bangladesh, the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission no longer having jurisdiction. Ashoke Kumar Paul is the chairman of the Commission.

The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission was established in 1973 by presidential order of President Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. In 1975, following the efforts of Dr MA Wazed Miah , the Atomic Energy Research Establishment was built in Saver.

The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission started its activities at a building for Jute Research Institute .  Afterwards it was transferred to Dhaka University campus at 4 Kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue.  Before 1988 it was spelled 'Bangladesh Anobik Shakti Kamishon' (Literary Meaning: Bangladesh Molecular Energy Commission) in Bangla, from then it was renamed 'Bangladesh Paramanu Shakti Kamishon' (Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission (BAEC)).  In 2006, the headquarters of BAEC was shifted to the newly built 'Poromanu Bhaban' building at Agargaon, Shere Bangla Nagar, Dhaka .   All the research and development activities of BAEC are conducted under three branches: physical sciences , biological sciences and engineering .

BAEC signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with Rosatom in 2009 to enhance cooperation between the two countries in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The MoU lays the groundwork for negotiations to set up the 600-1000 MW Ruppur Nuclear Power Plant in Bangladesh.

In May 2018, the commission signed a memorandum of understanding with Daffodil International University . The commission is tasked with the implementation of Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant , the country's first nuclear power plant. After completion the plant will be managed by the newly created Nuclear Power Plant Company Bangladesh Limited.

In 2022, the parliament of Bangladesh passed the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission (amendment) Bill which changed the titles of senior executives in the commission.