A beneficial weed can be an invasive plant that has some companion plant effect which is edible , contributes to soil health , adds ornamental value, and as well as beneficial also. These plants are normally not domesticated . However, some invasive plants, such as dandelions are commercially cultivated in addition to growing in the wild. Beneficial weeds include many wildflowers , as well as other weeds that are commonly removed or poisoned . Certain weeds that have obnoxious and destructive qualities have been shown to fight illness and are thus used in medicine. Reductions in abundances of weeds which act as hosts may affect associated insects and other taxa which are beneficial. For example, Parthenium hysterophorus which is native to Northern Mexico and parts of the US, has been an issue for years due to its toxicity and ability to spread rapidly. In the past few decades though research has found that Parthenium hysterophorus has been used in traditional medicine to treat inflammation, pain, fever, neurological disorders and diseases like malaria dysentery. It is also known to create Biogas that can be used as a bioremediation agent to break down heavy metals and other pollutants.

Beneficial weeds are erroneously considered to compete with neighboring plants for food and moisture. However, some "weeds" provide the soil with nutrients, either directly or indirectly.

Many weeds protect nearby plants from pest insects . Some beneficial weeds release volatile organic compounds that mask the scents of nearby plants, as with alliums and wormwood ; others imitate the pheromones of pest insects and confuse them, as with ground ivy , oregano , and other mints . In addition, a number of beneficial weeds have spines or other features that deter pest insects.

Some weeds act as trap crops , distracting pests away from valued plants. Insects often search for target plants by smell, and then land at random on anything green in the area of the scent. If they land on an edible "weed", they will stay there instead of going on to the intended victim. Sometimes, they actively prefer the trap crop.

The use of certain weeds integrated around native or otherwise intended plants has been found to be beneficial in many ways. A 2015 study showed that the presence of other plants or decoy plants made of green plastic, cardboard, or any other green materials can significantly reduce the success rate of flying pests in locating their host plants. These pests:

Some "weed" species, such as subterranean clover ( Trifolium subterraneum L .), have been found to be specifically beneficial against pests targeting crops of common cabbage ( Brassica ) species, reducing insects by 39%-100% on brassica plants when they were sown surrounded with clover as compared to when surrounded by bare soil. The differences in the colonization of such insects appear sufficient to determine the lower numbers of insects found that where when host plants are surrounded and under sown with clover.

Many plants can grow intercropped in the same space because they exist on different levels in the same area, providing ground cover or working as a trellis for each other. This healthier style of horticulture is called forest gardening . Larger plants provide a wind break or shelter from the noonday sun for more delicate plants.

Conversely, some intercropped plants provide a living mulch effect, able to inhibit the growth of harmful weeds and create a humid, cooler microclimate around nearby plants to stabilize soil moisture.

Plants such as ryegrass , red clover , and white clover are examples of "weeds" that are living mulches, often welcomed in horticulture.

Plants or fungi can be repelled through a chemical means known as allelopathy . Certain plants can be affected by a chemical emission through their roots or air, slowing their growth, preventing seed germination , or even killing them.

A common companion plant benefit from many weeds is to attract and provide habitat for beneficial insects or other organisms that benefit plants.

For example, wild umbellifers attract predatory wasps and flies. The adults eat nectar, but they feed common garden pests to their offspring.

Some weeds attract lady beetles or "good" types of nematodes , or provide ground cover for predatory beetles.