Bliss is the default wallpaper of Microsoft's Windows XP operating system. It is an unedited photograph of a green hill and blue sky with white clouds in the Los Carneros American Viticultural Area of Wine Country , California. Charles O'Rear took the photo in January 1996 and Microsoft bought the rights in 2000. It is estimated that billions of people have seen the picture.

The photograph depicts a green rolling hill and clouds during a daytime sky. It was taken by Charles O'Rear , a former National Geographic photographer and resident of St. Helena, California in the Napa Valley region north of San Francisco, while on his way to visit his girlfriend in January 1996. He drove along the Sonoma Highway, California State Route 12 and 121 , when he saw the hill, free of the vineyards that covered the area; they had been pulled out several years earlier following a phylloxera infestation. O'Rear stopped near the Napa – Sonoma county line and pulled off the road.

O'Rear recalled that he was working with his girlfriend on a book about the Wine Country , and that he was alert for a photo opportunity the day he took the photograph, considering that a storm had passed over, and winter rains left the hills green. "There it was! My God, the grass is perfect! It's green! The sun is out; there's some clouds," he remembered thinking. He took four shots and got back into his truck.

O'Rear used a Mamiya RZ67 medium-format camera on a tripod and Fujifilm 's Velvia , a film used among nature photographers and known to saturate some colors. He credited the combination and said that if he had shot with 35 mm film it would not have had the identical result. Despite being widely believed that the photograph was manipulated or created with software such as Adobe Photoshop , O'Rear said that the photograph was not digitally enhanced or manipulated in any way.

Since it was not pertinent to the wine-country book, O'Rear made the photograph available as a stock photo through Westlight, a photo agency he co-founded in 1980. Westlight was bought by Corbis in 1998, who digitized its best-selling images. He also submitted a vertical shot, which was available at the same time.

In 2000, Microsoft 's Windows XP development team contacted O'Rear through Corbis, which he believes they used instead of larger competitor Getty Images , also based in Seattle, because the former company was owned by Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates . "I have no idea what [they] were looking for," he recalls. "Were they looking for an image that was peaceful? Were they looking for an image that had no tension?" Another image of O'Rear's titled Full Moon over Red Dunes , known as Red moon desert in Windows XP, was also considered as the default wallpaper, but was changed due to testers comparing it to buttocks.

Microsoft said they wanted not just to license the image for use as XP's default wallpaper, but to buy all the rights to it. They offered O'Rear what he says is the second-largest payment ever made to a photographer for a single image; however, he signed a confidentiality agreement and cannot disclose the exact amount. It has been reported to be "in the low six figures." O'Rear needed to send Microsoft the original film and sign the paperwork; however, when couriers and delivery services became aware of the value of the shipment, they declined since it was higher than their insurance would cover. Instead, Microsoft bought O'Rear a plane ticket, and he personally delivered it to their offices. "I had no idea where it was going to go," he said. "I don't think the engineers or anybody at Microsoft had any idea it would have the success it had." Microsoft chose the image because "it illustrates the experiences Microsoft strives to provide customers (freedom, possibility, calmness, warmth, etc.)."

Although it is often said that it was cropped slightly to the left and the greens were made slightly stronger, the version Microsoft bought from Corbis had been cropped like this to begin with, while the saturation is a result of the Velvia film. After the rights to the photograph were bought by Microsoft, it was named Bliss and was chosen as the default wallpaper of the Windows XP operating system. The image was used by Microsoft for their $200 million "Yes You Can" advertising campaign to promote their software.

Since the origins of the image were not widely known for several years after XP's release, there had been considerable speculation about where the landscape was. Some guesses have included locations in Ireland, France, England, Scotland, Switzerland, the North Otago region of New Zealand, southeastern Washington and the south of Tübingen , Germany. Dutch users believed the photograph was shot in Ireland's County Kerry since the image was named "Ireland" in the Dutch release of the software; similarly, the image was named " Alentejo " in the Portuguese version, leading users speaking that language to believe it had been taken in the eponymous region of Portugal. Other users have speculated that the image was not of a real location, that the sky came from a separate image and was spliced together with the hill. O'Rear is adamant that, other than Corbis' minor alterations to the digitized version, he did nothing to it in a darkroom , contrasting it with Adams' Monolith :

I didn't "create" this. I just happened to be there at the right moment and documented it. If you are Ansel Adams and you take a particular picture of Half Dome and want the light a certain way, you manipulate the light. He was famous for going into the darkroom and burning and dodging . Well, this is none of that.

Microsoft retired Windows XP in 2014.

In November 2006, Goldin+Senneby visited the site in Sonoma Valley where the Bliss image was taken, re-photographing the same view now full of grapevines. Their work After Microsoft was first shown in the exhibition "Paris was Yesterday" at the gallery La Vitrine in April 2007. It was later exhibited at 300m³ in Gothenburg .

Due to the market success of Windows XP over the next decade, some journalists even speculated it might be the most viewed photograph in history. Cynthia Sweeney of Napa Valley Register estimated that the photograph has been seen by billions of people. O'Rear estimates that the image has been seen on a billion computers worldwide, based on the number of copies of XP sold since then.

O'Rear concedes that despite all the other photographs he took for National Geographic , he will probably be remembered most for Bliss . "Anybody now from age 15 on for the rest of their life will remember this photograph," he said in 2014.

In 2012, David Clark of the British magazine Amateur Photographer commented on Bliss ' s aesthetic qualities. "Critics might argue that the image is bland and lacks a point of interest, while supporters would say that its evocation of a bright, clear day in a beautiful landscape is itself the subject", he wrote. He notes the "dreamlike quality" created by the filtered sunlight on the hillside as distinguishing the image. "What made Microsoft choose the image above all others?" he asked. Although the company had never told O'Rear or anyone else, Clark thought he could guess. "It's attractive, easy on the eye and doesn't detract from other items that might be on the screen are all contributing factors. It may also have been chosen because it's an unusually inviting image of a verdant landscape and one that promotes a sense of wellbeing in desk-bound computer users."

In December 2001, Microsoft released a screensaver under the name of Bliss , with the scenery similar to the image, but with animating effects. On July 8, 2021, the Microsoft 365 team published a series of nostalgic themed Microsoft Teams backgrounds, that included a wallpaper based on the scenery of Bliss .

Bliss has been a subject of parodies.