Blitum bonus-henricus ( syn. Chenopodium bonus-henricus ), also called Good-King-Henry , poor-man's asparagus , perennial goosefoot , Lincolnshire spinach , Markery , English mercury , or mercury goosefoot , is a species of goosefoot which is native to much of central and southern Europe .

Good-King-Henry has been grown as a vegetable in cottage gardens for hundreds of years, although this dual-purpose vegetable is now rarely grown and the species is more often considered a weed .

It is an annual or perennial plant growing up to 40–80 centimetres (16–31 inches) tall. The leaves are 5–10 cm (2–4 in) long and broad, triangular to diamond-shaped, with a pair of broad pointed lobes near the base, with a slightly waxy, succulent texture. The flowers are produced in a tall, nearly leafless spike 10–30 cm (4–12 in) long; each flower is very small ( 3–5 millimetres or 1 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 16 inch in diameter), green, with five sepals . The seeds are reddish-green, 2–3 mm in diameter.

The species was described in 1753 by Carl Linnaeus as Chenopodium bonus-henricus in Species Plantarum . Until 2012, the species was usually included in genus Chenopodium , but molecular genetical research revealed that it does not really belong to this genus. It seems to be more closely related to the genus Spinacia , and is now placed in the genus Blitum in  the tribe Anserineae . The scientific name Blitum bonus-henricus was first used by Ludwig Reichenbach in 1832.

Synonyms basing on the same type specimen are: Agathophytum bonus-henricus (L.) Moq. , Anserina bonus-henricus (L.) Dumort. , Atriplex bonus-henricus (L.) Crantz , Chenopodium bonus-henricus L. , Orthospermum bonus-henricus (L.) Schur , and Orthosporum bonus-henricus (L.) T. Nees. Heterotypic synonyms are: Blitum perenne Bubani , Chenopodium hastatum St.-Lag. , Chenopodium ruderale Kit. ex Moq. , Chenopodium ruderale St.-Lag. , Chenopodium sagittatum Lam. , Chenopodium spinacifolium Stokes , Chenopodium triangulare Dulac , Chenopodium triangularifolia Gilib. , and Orthosporum unctuosum Montandon .

Cropping can begin in spring. Some of the new shoots can be thinned out as they appear (usually from mid-spring to early summer) and cooked like asparagus . All cutting should then cease so that shoots are allowed to develop. The succulent triangular leaves may be harvested a few at a time until the end of August and cooked like spinach .