BP Solar was a manufacturer and installer of photovoltaic solar cells headquartered in Madrid , Spain , with production facilities in Frederick, MD , India and the People's Republic of China . It was a subsidiary of BP .

In 1981, BP acquired initially 50% of Lucas Energy Systems which became Lucas BP Solar Systems. The company became wholly owned by BP in the mid-1980s. When BP merged with Amoco in 1998 it acquired Amoco's 50% stake in Solarex . In 1999 it acquired Enron 's stake in Solarex and consolidated its PV divisions into a new subsidiary named BP Solarex . In that year the company became the world's leading PV producer. In 2001 the division renamed itself BP Solar .

BP Solar and Indian firm Tata Power established Tata BP Solar , a joint venture company, in 1989. The company began commercial operations in 1991 by establishing its first manufacturing unit with a production capacity of 3 MW in India. BP Solar exited the joint venture in 2012, and Tata BP Solar became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Tata Group .

In 2004, the R&D part of BP Solar was sold to the UK's National Renewable Energy Centre (Narec) . In 2013, it became Solar Capture Technologies. In 2010, it closed down the factory at Frederick, Maryland . BP Solar closed on 21 December 2011 when BP announced its departure from the solar energy business.

PV power plants using BP solar modules include:

BP Solar had many projects and co-operative activities in developing countries, including supplying power to 36,000 homes in rural Indonesia , installing 1000 solar devices to provide power to 400 remote villages in the Philippines , and setting up a rural electrification scheme in Malaysia to provide power to 30,000 remote homes in Sabah, Sarawak and Peninsular Malaysia. In the mid-1980s BP installed Solar power for Microwave repeater stations across Sierra Leone in support of a telecommunications network restoration.

BP Solar (with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation — CSIRO) was also involved in the commercialization of a long-life deep cycle lead acid battery, which is well suited to the storage of electricity for renewable remote area power systems ( RAPS ). This GreenGel battery, and CSIRO's new battery charging procedures, will reduce capacity loss and premature failure sometimes encountered with existing battery technology. A significant component of the project will be the establishment of an innovative manufacturing process to enable the production of these advanced batteries at an internationally competitive price, facilitating a major export market.