Galaxy Cyclone Braiger ( 銀河旋風ブライガー , Ginga Senpū Buraigā ) is a mecha anime series aired from 1981 to 1982 in Japan . There were 39 episodes aired. Other loosely translated names include " Braiger ", " Bryger ", " Brygar ", " Galactic Whirlwind Bryger ", " Galactic Cyclone Braiger ", and " Cosmo Runner ".  It is the first entry in the J9 Series , and the overarching story continues in Galactic Gale Baxingar and Galactic Whirlwind Sasuraiger over the course of several centuries.

In the year 2111, the Solar System has been colonised . The colonies have various criminal organisations running amok. Team Cosmoranger J9 is assembled with Isaac Godonov, Blaster Kid, Steven Bowie, and Angel Omachi fighting the underworld scourge throughout the solar system. With the robot Braiger, they are a mercenary team that will handle any missions the police will not handle.

Meanwhile, Earth has been divided into the four Connections of Omega, Red Dragon, Volga and Nubia while the other celestial bodies are divided into the five Connections of Galico (Jupiter), Viking (Mars), Venus, Uranus, and the Weapons Guild (Mercury). Through Khamen Khamen, Nubia hatches a plan to rule the solar system in which Jupiter is destroyed, leading to the creation of over 30 smaller planets that could sustain life. However, such a plan would lead to the destruction of Earth's inhabitants.

Braiger is primarily a flying car referred to in the series as Brai-Thunder that can activate synchron energy to grow in size for up to twenty four hours by transporting matter from another universe onto itself. Upon doing this the Brai-Thunder can transform into its shuttle form, Brai-Star . If needed the synchron energy can be charged up to maximum capacity, allowing the Brai-Star to transform into Braiger.

The series was supposedly inspired by real-life scientific research and used a lot of Korean talents at the lower ranks of production. The Braiger illustrator ( Kazuo Komatsubara ) was asked to create characters that looked like those in Lupin III . The music in the series is also heavily influenced by rock and roll , although the ending theme has more in common with blues.

The robot has been featured in the video games Super Robot Wars Alpha Gaiden and Super Robot Wars GC ; the latter of which appeared with the other robots of the J9 Trilogy. For these appearances, Isaac Goodenov was performed by Ryōtarō Okiayu , and Jotaro Kidou by Takumi Yamazaki . In terms of enemies Khamen Khamen's ship appears in both games with Bumblebee XOs in Alpha Gaiden and Abshens in GC. Braiger also appeared in Super Robot Wars NEO for the Wii, although it had no actual plot.