Brian A. LaMacchia is a computer security specialist.

LaMacchia is currently the Executive Director of the MPC Alliance. LaMacchia was previously a Distinguished Engineer at Microsoft and headed the Security and Cryptography team within Microsoft Research (MSR). His team’s main project was the development of quantum-resistant public-key cryptographic algorithms and protocols. Brian was also a founding member of the Microsoft Cryptography Review Board and consulted on security and cryptography architectures, protocols and implementations across the company; previously he was the Director of Security and Cryptography in the Microsoft Extreme Computing Group.  He played a leading role in the design of XKMS , the security architecture for .NET and Palladium . He designed and led the development team for the .NET security architecture. He was a security architect on Palladium . LaMacchia was originally well known for his work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology establishing the MIT PGP Key Server , the first key centric PKI implementation to see wide-scale use. LaMacchia wrote the first Web interface for a PGP Key Server. He is a submitter of the Frodo post-quantum proposal to the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization project.

His leadership has also been recognized by his membership in  the  Computing Community Consortium (CCC) Council.

He has played a leading role in the design of W3C XMLDsig and XKMS standards.  In particular he is an author of versions 1.0, 1.1 and 2.0 XMLDsig.  He is a contributor to XKMS . He is coauthor on OASIS standard WS-SECURITY.

LaMacchia earned S.B. , S.M. , and Ph.D. degrees from MIT in 1990, 1991, and 1996, respectively.

As of 2024, LaMacchia is serving his third three-year term as Treasurer of the International Association for Cryptologic Research . He first joined the IACR Board of Directors in 2015 as General Chair of CRYPTO 2016. LaMacchia also serves as a member of the Board of Directors of Seattle Opera . He previously served for ten years as member of the board of directors of the Seattle International Film Festival , including the 2015-2016 term as president of SIFF.