Business informatics ( BI ) is a discipline combining economics , the economics of digitization , business administration , accounting , internal auditing , information technology (IT), and concepts of computer science . Business informatics centers around creating programming and equipment frameworks which ultimately provide the organization with effective operation based on information technology application. The focus on programming and equipment boosts the value of the analysis of economics and information technology. The BI discipline was created in Germany (in German : Wirtschaftsinformatik). It is an established academic discipline , including bachelor , master , diploma , and PhD programs in Austria , Belgium , Egypt, France , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , The Netherlands , Russia , Slovakia , Sweden , Switzerland , and Turkey , and is establishing itself in an increasing number of other countries as well, including Finland , Australia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Malaysia , Mexico , Poland , India and South Africa .

Business informatics shows similarities to information systems (IS), which is a well-established discipline originating in North America . However, there are a few differences that make business informatics a unique discipline:

Information systems (IS) focus on empirically explaining the phenomena of the real world. Information systems has been said to have an "explanation-oriented" focus in contrast to the "solution-oriented" focus that dominates business informatics. Information systems researchers make an effort to explain the phenomena of acceptance and influence of IT in organizations and society by applying an empirical approach. In order to do that, usually qualitative and quantitative empirical studies are conducted and evaluated. In contrast to that, business informatics researchers mainly focus on the creation of IT solutions for challenges they have observed or assumed, and thereby they focus more on the possible future uses of IT.

Tight integration between research and teaching following the Humboldtian ideal a major goal in business informatics. Insights gained in actual research projects become part of the curricula quite quickly since most researchers are also lecturers at the same time. The pace of scientific and technological progress in business informatics is quite rapid; therefore, subjects taught are under permanent reconsideration and revision. In its evolution, the business informatics discipline is fairly young. Therefore, significant hurdles have to be overcome in order to further establish its vision.

Specialists in business informatics can work both in research and in commerce. In business, there are various uses, which may vary depending on professional experience. Fields of employment may include:

In consulting, a clear line must be drawn between strategic and IT consulting .

Business & Information Systems Engineering