Typography , as an aspect of cartographic design , is the craft of designing and placing text on a map in support of the map symbols , together representing geographic features and their properties. It is also often called map labeling or lettering , but typography is more in line with the general usage of typography . Throughout the history of maps to the present, their labeling has been dependent on the general techniques and technologies of typography.

For most of the history of Cartography , the text on maps was hand drawn, and Calligraphy was an essential part of the skill set of the cartographer. This did not change with the advent of printing in the 15th Century, because the dispersed placement of the text did not lend itself to the use of Movable type . Instead, printed maps, including text, were drawn, engraved, and printed using the Intaglio or "copperplate" process. It was typical for the cartographer to not label the map himself, but to leave it to the master engraver. Text styles frequently changed with the tastes of the time, but were often very ornate, especially in non-map elements such as the title.

The development of Photoengraving , Zincography , and wax engraving in the mid-19th Century significantly changed the production of maps and their labels, enabling the addition of printed type to maps using stamps, but map lettering still required a great deal of skill; this remained the state of the art until the development of Photolithography in the 1950s. The photographic platemaking process meant that type could be produced on paper in a variety of ways, producing map labels of the same quality as book text. That said, as late as 1960, Arthur H. Robinson still advised new cartographers to be skilled in freehand lettering, and mechanical lettering tools were still in common usage through the 1980s, encouraging a very simplistic functional style over any aesthetic character.

A significant turning point was "Die Anordnung der Namen in der Karte", a 1962 essay (re-published in English in 1975) by Swiss cartographer Eduard Imhof , considered the greatest European cartographer of his day. Imhof analyzed the best maps he could find, such as the Swisstopo topographic maps, deriving a set of general principles and guidelines for type design and placement, which subsequent research has largely corroborated and further developed, and which forms the core canon on the topic found in modern cartography textbooks. In 1972, Pinhas Yoeli began to codify Imhof's guidelines mathematically, setting the stage for Automatic label placement . In 2000, Clifford Wood extended Imhof's guidelines, based on the intervening 25 years of research and practice.

The rise of Desktop publishing around 1990, including graphics software , laser printers , and inkjet printers , combined with the improving design capabilities of Geographic information systems , greatly increased and facilitated the more thoughtful design and use of type on maps. A wealth of typefaces became available, and it became easy to place text anywhere on the map. This completed the shift of skill in map typography from construction to design.

Text simultaneously serves several purposes on maps. In 1993, D. J. Fairbairn introduced a taxonomy of the purposes of text on maps, identifying fourteen types of text role. Since then, others, such as cartography textbooks, have described the variety of roles of text, with the following generally being the most common:

In 1929, Ordnance Survey cartographer Captain John G. Withycombe, in a critique of the state of map lettering, listed five essential aims of cartographic typography.

In his 1962 paper, Imhof reiterated the primary importance of legibility, and added the following requirements (listed here with modern terminology); he then showed how most specific guidelines and practices are derived from these principles:

In subsequent literature, textbooks, and the GIS&T Body of Knowledge , legibility, association, and hierarchy are typically listed as the most crucial of these aims, while conflict avoidance is one of the core foundations of Automatic label placement .

Many of the aspects of type styling can be chosen and controlled by the cartographer when designing a particular label to serve the above purposes. In this sense, they are akin to the visual variables of map symbology ; in fact, Jacques Bertin extended his own visual variable system to including type styling in 1980 (in French). This work has largely been ignored in English-speaking countries, although similar ideas have been developed by others. The most commonly cited and used typographic variables include:

Determining the ideal location for each label that needs to be on the map is a complex process, with hundreds or thousands of labels competing for space, in addition to the map symbols which are usually more important. It is not a purely subjective decision process; for each label, some locations meet the aims above (especially legibility and association) better than others. An understanding of what makes some placement better than others thus streamlines the process of creating an effective map.

Early textbooks provided some general advice, but the primary contribution of Imhof's 1962 (English 1975) paper was to analyze the best practices of cartographers, and set forth a clear set of rules for label placement. Since then, there has been surprisingly little research into the validity of these rules, especially compared to the numerous psychophysical studies examining many other parts of the map. Even Wood's 2000 update of Imhof, which adds many more guidelines, seems to still be based largely on best practices rather than science. That said, the durability of many of them, in the face of sweeping changes in technology and the capabilities of textual design, and their continued use in professional practice, points to their strength. After decades, only a few of Imhof's original rules have fallen out of favor.

Between Imhof, Wood, and other sources (especially textbooks), it is possible to list dozens of label placement rules. However, dutiful reliance on such lists can be misleading. According to Wood,

The suggestions or 'rules' that follow are intended as guidelines to the intelligent positioning of type, not as inviolate laws to be followed blindly. In the practical application of these principles, it will seldom be possible to satisfy all the rules applying to a given situation. The cartographer must apply the total 'sense' of the guidelines, accepting some and rejecting others.

The "sense of the guidelines" Wood mentions are the aims of legibility, feature association, and a harmonious aesthetic of the map as ordered, professional, and clear. Almost all suggested guidelines can be deduced by evaluating possible labels according to those aims.

From the various lists of placement guidelines, the following is a sample of those most commonly emphasized:

This also includes area features that are too small to label inside, in which case an exterior label treats the area symbol as a point symbol.

Often, these guidelines are also followed for area features with a very linear shape, such as wide rivers.

These guidelines also apply to clusters of points or small areas being labeled as a single feature, such as an island chain.

The software that is commonly used to create maps, including both geographic information systems and graphic design programs, provide a number of options for creating, editing, and storing the hundreds or even thousands of labels in a map. Each of these has advantages and disadvantages for particular situations.

Manually placing a large number of labels is a very time-consuming process, even in modern software; this is especially problematic in Web mapping , where millions of maps are generated every day with no direct input from a cartographer on label placement. Starting in the 1970s, the need for automation was recognized. Yoeli (1972) recognized that many of the placement guidelines espoused by Imhof (1962) and others had an algorithmic or mathematical character to them, which he attempted to specify in preparation for future placement algorithms.

Since then, increasingly robust algorithms have been developed, and existing computational algorithms (such as Simulated annealing ) have been adapted to the labeling problem. Today, automated label placement tools are widespread, and is found in software as varied as GI, batch map renderers such as Mapnik , and javascript mapping libraries. That said, because map labelling involves subjective judgments as well as rules or guidelines, most algorithms produce rules that are sub-optimal, especially in complex maps. When possible, cartographers generally use automated labels as a starting point, then refine them.

The other option is to store the location and style of each label in the map data, just like the rest of the map; this is typically called annotation . Text can be modeled as a Geometric primitive , like points, lines, and polygons, and in graphics software , it is stored in the map document in the same way as other geometry, allowing for manual editing of content, position, and style. Many GIS platforms also have this option, but some have the additional option of storing text as a dataset, enabling the same annotation to be reused in multiple maps.