Celestial cartography , uranography , astrography or star cartography is the aspect of astronomy and branch of cartography concerned with mapping stars , galaxies , and other astronomical objects on the celestial sphere . Measuring the position and light of charted objects requires a variety of instruments and techniques. These techniques have developed from angle measurements with quadrants and the unaided eye , through sextants combined with lenses for light magnification, up to current methods which include computer-automated space telescopes . Uranographers have historically produced planetary position tables , star tables, and star maps for use by both amateur and professional astronomers. More recently, computerized star maps have been compiled, and automated positioning of telescopes uses databases of stars and of other astronomical objects.

The word "uranography" derived from the Greek "ουρανογραφια" ( Koine Greek ουρανος "sky, heaven" + γραφειν "to write") through the Latin "uranographia" . In Renaissance times, Uranographia was used as the book title of various celestial atlases . During the 19th century, "uranography" was defined as the "description of the heavens". Elijah H. Burritt re-defined it as the "geography of the heavens". The German word for uranography is " Uranographie ", the French is " uranographie " and the Italian is " uranografia ".

Astrometry , the science of spherical astronomy , is concerned with precise measurements of the location of celestial bodies in the celestial sphere and their kinematics relative to a reference frame on the celestial sphere. In principle, astrometry can involve such measurements of planets, stars, black holes and galaxies to any celestial body.

Throughout human history, astrometry played a significant role in shaping our understanding of the structure of the visible sky, which accompanies the location of bodies in it, hence making it a fundamental tool to celestial cartography.

A determining fact source for drawing star charts is naturally a star table. This is apparent when comparing the imaginative "star maps" of Poeticon Astronomicon – illustrations beside a narrative text from the antiquity – to the star maps of Johann Bayer , based on precise star-position measurements from the Rudolphine Tables by Tycho Brahe .