Curtin University (previously Curtin University of Technology and Western Australian Institute of Technology ) is an Australian public research university based in Bentley , Perth , Western Australia. It is named after John Curtin , Prime Minister of Australia from 1941 to 1945, and is Western Australia's largest university, with 58,607 students in 2022.

WAIT was established in 1966. Curtin was conferred university status after the Parliament of Western Australia passed legislation in 1986. Since then, the university has expanded its presence and has campuses in Singapore , Malaysia , Dubai and Mauritius , and has ties with 90 exchange universities in 20 countries. The university comprises five main faculties with over 95 specialists centres. It had a campus in Sydney from 2005 to 2016.

Curtin University is a member of the Australian Technology Network . Curtin is active in research in a range of academic and practical fields. As of 2020, it is Western Australia's only university whose students have won the Australian Institute of Nuclear Science and Engineering's Postgraduate Student Gold Medal.

Curtin University was founded in 1966 as the Western Australian Institute of Technology. The four people who drove its establishment were Lesley Phillips, who was Superintendent of Technical Education from 1943 to 1948; George Hayman, who held the same position from 1948 to 1962; T. L. Robertson, Director of Education; and Haydn Williams, Director of Technical Education.

Its nucleus comprised the tertiary programs of the Perth Technical College , which opened in 1900. The university's Bentley campus was selected in 1962 and officially opened in 1966. The first students enrolled in 1967. Haydn Williams was the first director of WAIT.

In 1969, three more institutions were merged with WAIT: the Kalgoorlie School of Mines (opened in 1902), the Muresk Agricultural College (opened in 1926), and the Schools of Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy (in operation since the 1950s at Shenton Park ). Between 1966 and 1976 WAIT experienced an expansion from 2,000 to 10,000 students.

In December 1986 WAIT was made a university, under provisions of the WA Institute of Technology Amendment Act 1986 . Curtin University took its name from former Prime Minister of Australia John Curtin . In 1987, Curtin University of Technology became Western Australia's third university and Australia's first university of technology. By the mid-1990s, it had enrolments of 20,000 students, making it one of Australia's largest universities.

In 1993, Curtin founded a graduate business school in St Georges Terrace . In 2002 it was moved to Murray Street , where it remains. The school was developed on the foundation of Curtin's existing Master of Business Administration program.

In 2005, Curtin and Murdoch University were engaged in a feasibility study into the possibility of a merger. On 7 November 2005, the institutions announced that a merger would not be undertaken.

In 2008, Curtin opened a campus in Singapore , its second offshore presence. In 2009, Curtin became the first university in the Australian Technology Network to be listed on the Academic Ranking of World Universities of research universities.

In 2010, Curtin dropped the "of Technology" suffix, from then operating as "Curtin University".

Curtin University's main campus is in Bentley, Western Australia , about 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) south-east of the Perth central business district. The campus was developed on a former pine plantation established in the 1930s.

Curtin has multiple smaller off-site campuses in the Perth metropolitan area. The Graduate School of Business building is in the Perth central business district in the renovated former Government Printing Office, and the law school is on Murray Street in the old Public Health Department and Chief Secretary's building, a listed building on the State Register of Heritage Places. In 2016, Curtin entered into an agreement with the National Trust of Australia (WA) to use the restored Old Perth Boys' School at 139 St Georges Terrace for community and industry engagement. In 2018, Curtin renovated the original Perth Technical College building at 137 St Georges Terrace to create meeting rooms and learning spaces for professional development and postgraduate courses.

Exploration Geophysics and Petroleum Engineering are at the co-location research facilities of the Australian Resources Research Centre (ARRC), which also houses offices of CSIRO Earth Science and Resource Engineering and National Measurement Institute. The ARRC is in the Technology Park Bentley, adjacent to the main Bentley campus. Some university staff, researchers and students on practicum work in other locations, such as the Oral Health Centre of WA (OHCWA) in Nedlands and at Royal Perth Hospital , amongst other organisations.

Curtin has two bus stations , connected to the Transperth public transport network. The stations are also linked to the Mandurah railway line 's Canning Bridge Station by a shuttle bus service. Curtin also has an internal bus network trialling autonomous buses on campus.

Curtin has campuses outside Perth , the largest being the Western Australian School of Mines at Kalgoorlie , and a number of micro-campuses in Esperance , Margaret River , Geraldton , and elsewhere. Nursing is the only course offered in Geraldton. The Muresk Institute at Northam left Curtin in 2012.

In April 2017 Curtin University established its newest campus in Dubai at Dubai International Academic City . Australian Ambassador to the UAE HE Arthur Spyrou officially opened the campus on 10 September 2017. Curtin University Dubai courses use the same structure and unit curriculum as those at the Bentley campus. Curtin University Dubai is accredited by the Knowledge and Human Development Authority (KHDA). The academic qualifications Curtin grants are certified by KHDA and recognised in the Emirate of Dubai by all public and private entities.

Curtin's largest international campus is in Miri , Sarawak , Malaysia. Curtin's operations in Miri began in February 1999. In 2002, a purpose-built campus was opened as Curtin's first offshore campus and the first foreign university campus in East Malaysia. It has around 4,000 students from over 45 countries, and academics from more than 15 countries. Curtin Malaysia is the only approved CISCO Networking University in Miri and Brunei.

Curtin University opened a Singapore-based campus on 23 November 2008. Curtin Singapore courses use the same structure and unit curriculum as those at the Bentley campus.

Curtin University opened its fourth international campus in Mauritius on 3 May 2018 on the campus of Charles Telfair Institute in Moka south of Port Louis .

Curtin University Sydney (Curtin Sydney) was established on 20 June 2005. The first campus was in The Rocks area. It later moved to the suburb of Chippendale , where it occupied the Berlei Building . Curtin Sydney's operation was contracted out to private tertiary education provider Navitas Group . It offered international students diploma, undergraduate and postgraduate courses. In 2014 Curtin Sydney was involved in a cash-for-results scandal where students since 2012 had paid MyMaster, a Sydney company, up to $1,000 each to write essays and assignments for them, as well as to sit online tests. In 2015, Curtin announced that Curtin Sydney would close in 2017.

From 2007, the university's teaching and research was divided into five faculties (previously known as divisions), which each include a number of schools. These schools were consolidated in 2020 during a period of staff cuts. These are:

The main library building is the TL Robertson Library, on the Bentley campus. It opened in 1972. After the building was extended in the 1990s, the university began a major refurbishment in 2021, due for completion in 2023. Also on the Bentley campus is the John Curtin Prime Ministerial Library, holding a large collection of papers relating to John Curtin as well as other special collections, including the papers of political figures John Dawkins, Geoff Gallop, Hazel Hawke, and Carmen Lawrence, and Curtin academics Mike Daube (tobacco control) and Jules Black (sexology).

The John Curtin Gallery (JCG) is on the Bentley campus, in building 200A. It has a focus on contemporary art , learning and research.

The Hayman Theatre was established in 1973 as Hayman Hall, for the use of theatre arts students. The Hall's name derives from George Hayman, who played a major part in establishing WAIT in 1967. The theatre study company Theatreground as well as the Western Australian Theatre Company used the space. It was refurbished in 1977, creating the Theatre Upstairs above the main stage. After the Bentley Campus was expanded, in 2017 Hayman Theatre moved to Building 302.

The university is one of the partners in the Western Australian Pregnancy Cohort (Raine) Study , one of the largest cohorts of pregnancy, childhood, adolescence and early adulthood to be carried out anywhere in the world.

Curtin University has achieved "Top 10 Australia University" status in 6 out of 10 major global rankings (ARWU, US News, CWUR, Leiden, RUR, URAP). Curtin is ranked 160th globally and 10th nationwide by U.S. News & World Report Best Global Universities Rankings in 2023. Curtin University is again ranked in the world's top one percent of universities and ninth in Australia based on the 2022 Academic Ranking of World Universities .

In addition, Curtin University has achieved its highest-ever result in the annual QS World University Rankings by rising to 174th globally in the 2025 edition. It was ranked 2nd in the world for Engineering – Mineral & Mining and 5th in Australia for Architecture in the 2022 QS World University Rankings by Subject .

Curtin's Creative Writing staff and alumni have won the Miles Franklin Award seven times.

Curtin University offers on campus accommodation at five separate precincts, managed by UniLodge: Kurrajong Village, Erica Underwood House, Guild House, Vickery House and St Catherine's College.

The Curtin Student Guild is the student union at Curtin University. It was founded in 1969 as the WAIT Student Guild.

The guild provides student representation services through the provision of faculty, international, postgraduate and equity representatives and the professional support service Student Assist.

The guild operates most food and beverage outlets on campus, including Guild Cafés (Central, Engineering, Library), Angazi, Concept Coffee Co and Mallokup food outlets. Other commercial services include G-Mart, Curtin University's general store , printing, stationery and news outlet and The Tav.

The guild operates and funds all Curtin student clubs and societies. It also runs a number of events throughout the year, most notably the Toga Party held in semester one and the previous notable event Grasslands Music Festival held in semester two. The guild publishes Grok magazine.

The Student Guild is governed independently of the University by students through the Guild Council, which consists of executive members: president, vice-presidents, secretary and councillors. All other representatives sit on the Representation Board. Students elect their representatives annually in September. Major Groups that contest elections include Illuminate, consisting of broadly left-wing Independent students ; Left Action, aligned with Socialist Alternative ; groups aligned with the Labor Right ; and Joke Ticket's , from various political leanings. The Guild currently has an Illuminate majority.

As of 2023, Curtin University's basketball teams, the Carnabys, play in the University Basketball League (UBL).

The men's team of the Curtin University Football Club is based on the main campus. The club currently ( 2023 ) competes in the Football West State League Division 2 .

The Curtin University FC women's team were one of the inaugural teams in the National Premier Leagues WA Women competition (which commenced in 2020), and is a part of the National Premier Leagues Women's structure. The team was previously part of the Women State League Division 1 from (at least) 2012 to 2019.

Curtin's faculty includes prominent scholars such as environmental scientist Peter Newman , writer Kim Scott and isotope geochemist Kliti Grice .

Past prominent faculty members include the postmodernist Niall Lucy , writer Elizabeth Jolley and journalist Robert Duffield . The broadcaster Erica Underwood was the first woman to serve on the main council in 1974 when it was the council of the Western Australian Institute of Technology .

Notable people who have attended Curtin University include:

Curtin has become active in research and partnerships overseas, particularly in mainland China, and has received funding from major Chinese companies, such as Tencent . It is involved in a number of business, management, and research projects, particularly in supercomputing, where the university participates in a tri-continental array with nodes in Perth, Beijing , and Edinburgh . The Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited the Woodside -funded hydrocarbon research facility during his visit to Australia in 2005. Funding from major Chinese companies connected to the state have led to concerns that Curtin University has limited academic freedom on certain topics.

In 2020, a roof at Curtin University collapsed, killing a 23-year-old construction worker after he fell more than 20 m (66 ft), and leaving two other construction workers injured.