In computing , cut is a command line utility on Unix and Unix-like operating systems which is used to extract sections from each line of input — usually from a file . It is currently part of the GNU coreutils package and the BSD Base System.

Extraction of line segments can typically be done by bytes ( -b ), characters ( -c ), or fields ( -f ) separated by a delimiter ( -d — the tab character by default). A range must be provided in each case which consists of one of N , N-M, N- ( N to the end of the line), or -M (beginning of the line to M ), where N and M are counted from 1 (there is no zeroth value). Since version 6, an error is thrown if you include a zeroth value. Prior to this the value was ignored and assumed to be 1.

The original Bell Labs version was written by Gottfried W. R. Luderer . cut is part of the X/Open Portability Guide since issue 2 of 1987. It was inherited into the first version of POSIX.1 and the Single Unix Specification . It first appeared in AT&T System III UNIX in 1982.

The version of cut bundled in GNU coreutils was written by David M. Ihnat, David MacKenzie, and Jim Meyering. The command is available as a separate package for Microsoft Windows as part of the UnxUtils collection of native Win32 ports of common GNU Unix-like utilities. The cut command has also been ported to the IBM i operating system.

Assuming a file named " file " containing the lines:

To output the fourth through tenth characters of each line:

To output the fifth field through the end of the line of each line using the colon character as the field delimiter:

(note that because the colon character is not found in the last line the entire line is shown)

Option -d specifies a single character delimiter (in the example above it is a colon) which serves as field separator. Option -f which specifies range of fields included in the output (here fields range from five till the end). Option -d presupposes usage of option -f .

To output the third field of each line using space as the field delimiter:

(Note that because the space character is not found in the first three lines these entire lines are shown.)

To separate two words having any delimiter:

Flags which may be used include: