David Faiman (born 1944 in the United Kingdom ) is a British and Israeli physicist .

Faiman was educated at Willesden County Grammar School and the University of London , and received his Ph.D from the University of Illinois in 1969. After post-doctoral appointments in Oxford and CERN he arrived in Israel in September 1973, to take up an appointment in theoretical physics at the Weizmann Institute of Science . However, as a result of the energy crisis that followed the Yom Kippur War , he re-directed his research interests from elementary particles into solar energy . In 1976 he was recruited by Amos Richmond to assist in founding the Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research at the Sede Boqer campus of Ben-Gurion University of the Negev . Faiman created the Institutes’ Department of Solar Energy & Environmental Physics, which he headed concurrently with the Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center until his retirement in 2013 at the rank of Professor Emeritus.
Faiman lives in Sede Boqer, Israel, in a passive solar house where almost all of the heating and cooling needs are taken care of by the sun. His hobbies include biblical geography, and the music of Giacomo Meyerbeer .

Faiman’s theoretical physics research focused on hadron spectroscopy using the quark model and various associated symmetries. His solar energy research spanned studies of solar radiation , energy conversion devices, and power-producing systems. His most celebrated work was the development, in collaboration with the Zenith Solar Company, of a 10 m2 mirrored, sun-tracking dish, which concentrated the sun’s rays 1,000 times onto a water-cooled solar array of dimensions 100 cm2. Under full sunshine, this system generated 2 kW of electric power and 5 kW of thermal power, the latter in the form of hot water at 80oC. Faiman was Israel’s representative on solar energy to UNESCO , the FAO and Tasks 2 and 8 of the International Energy Agency . Within the latter framework he co-authored the series of books Energy from the Desert .