Defensive programming is a form of defensive design intended to develop programs that are capable of detecting potential security abnormalities and make predetermined responses. It ensures the continuing function of a piece of software under unforeseen circumstances. Defensive programming practices are often used where high availability , safety , or security is needed.

Defensive programming is an approach to improve software and source code , in terms of:

Overly defensive programming, however, may safeguard against errors that will never be encountered, thus incurring run-time and maintenance costs.

Secure programming is the subset of defensive programming concerned with computer security . Security is the concern, not necessarily safety or availability (the software may be allowed to fail in certain ways). As with all kinds of defensive programming, avoiding bugs is a primary objective; however, the motivation is not as much to reduce the likelihood of failure in normal operation (as if safety were the concern), but to reduce the attack surface – the programmer must assume that the software might be misused actively to reveal bugs, and that bugs could be exploited maliciously.

The function will result in undefined behavior when the input is over 1000 characters. Some programmers may not feel that this is a problem, supposing that no user will enter such a long input. This particular bug demonstrates a vulnerability which enables buffer overflow exploits . Here is a solution to this example:

Offensive programming is a category of defensive programming, with the added emphasis that certain errors should not be handled defensively . In this practice, only errors from outside the program's control are to be handled (such as user input); the software itself, as well as data from within the program's line of defense, are to be trusted in this methodology .

Here are some defensive programming techniques:

If existing code is tested and known to work, reusing it may reduce the chance of bugs being introduced.

However, reusing code is not always good practice. Reuse of existing code, especially when widely distributed, can allow for exploits to be created that target a wider audience than would otherwise be possible and brings with it all the security and vulnerabilities of the reused code.

When considering using existing source code, a quick review of the modules(sub-sections such as classes or functions) will help eliminate or make the developer aware of any potential vulnerabilities and ensure it is suitable to use in the project.

Before reusing old source code, libraries, APIs, configurations and so forth, it must be considered if the old work is valid for reuse, or if it is likely to be prone to legacy problems.

Legacy problems are problems inherent when old designs are expected to work with today's requirements, especially when the old designs were not developed or tested with those requirements in mind.

Many software products have experienced problems with old legacy source code; for example:

Notable examples of the legacy problem:

Malicious users are likely to invent new kinds of representations of incorrect data. For example, if a program attempts to reject accessing the file "/etc/ passwd ", a cracker might pass another variant of this file name, like "/etc/./passwd". Canonicalization libraries can be employed to avoid bugs due to non- canonical input.

Assume that code constructs that appear to be problem prone (similar to known vulnerabilities, etc.) are bugs and potential security flaws.  The basic rule of thumb is: "I'm not aware of all types of security exploits .  I must protect against those I do know of and then I must be proactive!".

These three rules about data security describe how to handle any data, internally or externally sourced:

All data is important until proven otherwise - means that all data must be verified as garbage before being destroyed.

All data is tainted until proven otherwise - means that all data must be handled in a way that does not expose the rest of the runtime environment without verifying integrity.

All code is insecure until proven otherwise - while a slight misnomer, does a good job reminding us to never assume our code is secure as bugs or undefined behavior may expose the project or system to attacks such as common SQL injection attacks.