Electromagnetic forming ( EM forming or magneforming ) is a type of high-velocity, cold forming process for electrically conductive metals, most commonly copper and aluminium . The workpiece is reshaped by high-intensity pulsed magnetic fields that induce a current in the workpiece and a corresponding repulsive magnetic field, rapidly repelling portions of the workpiece. The workpiece can be reshaped without any contact from a tool, although in some instances the piece may be pressed against a die or former. The technique is sometimes called high-velocity forming or electromagnetic pulse technology .

A special coil is placed near the metallic workpiece, replacing the pusher in traditional forming. When the system releases its intense magnetic pulse, the coil generates a magnetic field which in turn accelerates the workpiece to hyper speed and onto the die.
The magnetic pulse and the extreme deformation speed transforms the metal into a visco-plastic state – increasing formability without affecting the native strength of the material. See the magnetic pulse forming illustration for a visualization.

A rapidly changing magnetic field induces a circulating electric current within a nearby conductor through electromagnetic induction . The induced current creates a corresponding magnetic field around the conductor (see Pinch (plasma physics) ). Because of Lenz's Law , the magnetic fields created within the conductor and work coil strongly repel each other.

In practice the metal workpiece to be fabricated is placed in proximity to a heavily constructed coil of wire (called the work coil ). A huge pulse of current is forced through the work coil by rapidly discharging a high-voltage capacitor bank using an ignitron or a spark gap as a switch . This creates a rapidly oscillating, ultra strong electromagnetic field around the work coil.

The high work coil current (typically tens or hundreds of thousands of amperes ) creates ultra strong magnetic forces that easily overcome the yield strength of the metal work piece, causing permanent deformation. The metal forming process occurs extremely quickly (typically tens of microseconds ) and, because of the large forces, portions of the workpiece undergo high acceleration reaching velocities of up to 300 m/s.

The forming process is most often used to shrink or expand cylindrical tubing, but it can also form sheet metal by repelling the work piece onto a shaped die at a high velocity . High-quality joints can be formed, either by electromagnetic pulse crimping with a mechanical interlock or by electromagnetic pulse welding with a true metallurgical weld. Since the forming operation involves high acceleration and deceleration, mass of the work piece plays a critical role during the forming process. The process works best with good electrical conductors such as copper or aluminum , but it can be adapted to work with poorer conductors such as steel .

Electromagnetic forming has a number of advantages and disadvantages compared to conventional mechanical forming techniques.

Some of the advantages are;

The principle disadvantages are;