Extensive farming or extensive agriculture (as opposed to intensive farming ) is an agricultural production system that uses small inputs of labour , fertilizers, and capital , relative to the land area being farmed.

Extensive farming most commonly means raising sheep and cattle in areas with low agricultural productivity, but includes large-scale growing of wheat , barley , cooking oils and other grain crops in areas like the Murray-Darling Basin in Australia . Here, owing to the extreme age and poverty of the soils, yields per hectare are very low, but the flat terrain and very large farm sizes mean yields per unit of labour are high. Nomadic herding is an extreme example of extensive farming, where herders move their animals to use feed from occasional rainfalls.

Extensive farming is found in the Mid-latitude sections of most continents, as well as in desert regions where water for cropping is not available. The nature of extensive farming means it requires less rainfall than intensive farming. The farm is usually large in comparison with the numbers working and money spent on it. In 1957, most parts of Western Australia had pastures so poor that only one sheep to the square mile could be supported.

Just as the demand has led to the basic division of cropping and pastoral activities, these areas can also be subdivided depending on the region's rainfall, vegetation type and agricultural activity within the area and the many other parentheses related to this data.

Extensive farming has a number of advantages over intensive farming:

Extensive farming can have the following problems:

Extensive farming was once thought to produce more methane and nitrous oxide per kg of milk than intensive farming. One study estimated that the carbon "footprint" per billion kg (2.2 billion lb.) of milk produced in 2007 was 37 percent that of equivalent milk production in 1944. However, a more recent study by Centre de coopération internationale en recherche agronomique pour le développement found that extensive livestock systems impact the environment less than intensive systems.