A motion picture content rating system classifies films based on their suitability for audiences due to their treatment of issues such as sex, violence, or substance abuse, their use of profanity, or other matters typically deemed unsuitable for children or adolescents. Most countries have some form of rating system that issues determinations variously known as certifications , classifications , certificates , or ratings . Age recommendations, of either an advisory or restrictive capacity, are often applied in lieu of censorship ; in some jurisdictions movie theaters may have a legal obligation to enforce restrictive ratings.

In countries such as Australia, Canada, and Singapore, an official government body decides on ratings; in other countries such as Denmark, Japan, and the United States, it is done by industry committees with little if any official government status. In most countries, however, films that are considered morally offensive have been censored, restricted, or banned. Even if the film rating system has no legal consequences, and a film has not explicitly been restricted or banned, there are usually laws forbidding certain films, or forbidding minors to view them. The influence of specific factors in deciding a rating varies from country to country.

Other factors may or may not influence the classification process, such as being set within a non-fictional historical context, whether the film glorifies violence or drug use, whether said violence or drug use is carried out by the protagonist, with whom the viewer should empathize, or by the antagonist. In Germany, for example, films depicting explicit war violence in a real war context (such as the Second World War) are handled more leniently than films with purely fictional settings.

A film may be produced with a particular rating in mind. It may be re-edited if the desired rating is not obtained, especially to avoid a higher rating than intended. A film may also be re-edited to produce a different version for other countries.

A comparison of current film rating systems, showing age on the horizontal axis. Note however that the specific criteria used in assigning a classification can vary widely from one country to another. Therefore, the color codes and age ranges are not directly comparable from one country to another.

Key:

Through its Advisory Commission of Cinematographic Exhibition ( Comisión Asesora de Exhibición Cinematográfica ) the National Institute of Cinema and Audiovisual Arts (INCAA) issues ratings for films based on the following categories:

The Classification Board and Classification Review Board are government-funded organisations which classify all films that are released for public exhibition.

Films intended to inform, educate or instruct or concerned with sport, religion or music are exempt from classification provided they do not contain material that would result in an "M" rating or higher if submitted for classification.

Motion pictures are rated by the Austrian Board of Media Classification (ABMC) for the Federal Ministry of Education, Arts and Culture (Bundesministerium für Unterricht, Kunst und Kultur). The recommendations made by the ABMC are generally not legally binding and there are nine sets of state laws on the cinema sector with different age provisions. The only exception is in the case of "16" rated films, since under Austrian law there is a legal age restriction on certain types of content i.e. discrimination, sexual abuse, glorification of violence etc. In addition to the ABMC's age recommendations, in the state of Vienna children under the age of 6 are only permitted to attend public film performances if they are accompanied.

The AMBC issues age recommendation from the following categories:

The Bahamas Plays and Films Control Board classifies films in the Bahamas. Upon completion of the examination the Board will classify the film in accordance with the following ratings:

In Barbados, films are classified by the Film Censorship Board (FCB):

On 8 January 2020, Belgium adopted the Dutch Kijkwijzer classification system. Belgium had previously used a basic two-tier system, in place since 1 September 1920. Until January 2020, classifications for films publicly exhibited in Belgium were issued by the Inter-Community Commission for Film Rating ( Dutch : Intergemeenschapscommissie voor de Filmkeuring ; French : Commission Intercommunautaire de Contrôle des Films ). Films were prohibited to minors under the age of 16 unless passed by the commission. There is no mandatory rating system for video formats but 90% of video distribution abides by the voluntary Belgium Video Federation. It was basically the same as the system for theatrical exhibition, but also provided a "12" rating. Under Kijkwijzer, the distributor fills out a questionnaire about the content of the film and an age category is automatically assigned. The new system is fully advisory, and carries no mandatory restrictions. In the French and German-speaking communities , the system is known as Cinecheck .

The age categories are as follows:

All films that are exhibited in public or released on a home video format in Brazil must be submitted for classification to the advisory rating ( Classificação Indicativa , abbreviated ClassInd), which is run by the Brazilian Ministry of Justice ( Ministério da Justiça ). Under 10 must always be accompanied by an adult guard, even for those rated L. Anyone below the film's minimum age can watch it if accompanied or allowed by the parent or guardian who is at least 18 years old, except for those rated 18, which can only be allowed for teenagers aged 16+. Unlike many countries, the ClassInd does not have any legal right to ban, demand cuts or refuse to rate any film.

The ClassInd uses the following system:

There are also operational descriptions of attenuating and aggravating elements that can interfere on the final rating.

The Bulgarian film rating system is defined in the Film Industry Act of 2003 and administered by the National Film Rating Committee. Since then, two more restrictive ratings (C+ and D+) have been added to the system:

In Cambodia, the Department of Movies and Promotion of Culture at the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts (MCFA) classifies films for exhibition in cinemas and on home media under the following age categories:

Film ratings in Canada are a provincial responsibility, and each province has its own legislation, rules and regulations regarding rating, exhibition and admission. Ratings are required for theatrical exhibition, but not all provinces require classification for home video. In the past there was a wide range of rating categories and practices in the various provinces; however, the seven rating systems—with the exception of Quebec—now all use categories and logos derived from the Canadian Home Video Rating System (CHVRS).

The categories are mostly identical to the CHVRS with a few minor variations. In the provinces that require classification of video formats, supply of 14A and 18A films is restricted to customers above those ages. In the case of theatre exhibition, children are admitted to 14A if accompanied by an adult. In British Columbia , Saskatchewan (administered by the British Columbia Film Classification Office), Alberta and Ontario children are also admitted to 18A films if accompanied. However, children under the age of 14 are prohibited to view 18A films in the Manitoba and Maritime provinces even if accompanied by an adult. The Maritimes and British Columbia (along with Saskatchewan) also provide an "A" classification for adult content. Some provinces, such as Nova Scotia, reserve the right to prohibit films altogether.

In general, the categories are:

In Quebec , the provincial Ministry of Culture and Communications (and until 2017 the Régie du cinéma ) rates all films and videos; its purview devolves from the Cinema Act (chapter C-18.1). In some cases the Ministry may refuse to provide a classification, effectively banning the film. Educational and sports films are exempt from classification.

Films are classified by the Council of Cinematographic Classification ( Consejo de Calificación Cinematográfica ) which is a central agency under the Ministry of Education. In 2002 legislation was enacted which reversed the ban on all 1,090 films that had previously been banned in Chile.

The current age ratings (enacted in 2002) are:

The age ratings may also be supplemented by the following content categories:

Minors are allowed to watch cinematographic productions rated in an immediately higher category than their age if accompanied by any of their parents, guardians, or their teachers within the framework of their educational activities. This rule does not apply to films with pornographic or excessively violent content. Furthermore, films with pornographic content may only be exhibited at venues licensed for that purpose.

In 2005, the Ministry of Culture issued its new rating system. The classifications are:

In the Cook Islands , publications such as films, TV shows and video games are classified by the Cook Islands Censorship Office in accordance with the Film and Censorship Act 1985. The following four classifications are used:

The Censorship Office does not define the age for a "mature audience", but its television code—which uses the same ratings—defines a child as "under 15 years".

In Costa Rica, films are classified by the Ministry of Justice and Peace:

In Denmark, the Media Council for Children and Young People currently rates films. Films do not have to be submitted for a rating and in such instances must be labelled a "15" (restricted to people aged 15 and above). Children aged 7 and above may attend any performance—including those restricted to older audiences—if they are accompanied by an adult.

Film classification in Estonia is regulated by the Child Welfare Act.

In Fiji, films are classified by the Fijian Censors Board:

Films in Finland are classified by the National Audiovisual Institute . A minor up to 3 years younger than the age limit is permitted to see a film in a cinema when accompanied by an adult, except for 18-rated films. Films with an age rating may contain an additional marker for violence, sex, fear, or substance abuse. The ratings are as follows:

Prior to showing in theatres, a distribution certificate must be obtained from the Ministry of Culture . The Minister will decide which certificate to issue based on a recommendation by the classification of the Centre national du cinéma et de l'image animée (CNC). In some cases, films may be classified as "pornographic films or those containing an incitement to violence" or completely prohibited from screening. A certificate will be granted from the following:

The Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle der Filmwirtschaft (Voluntary Self-Regulation of the Film Industry, FSK) has a film ratings system under which films are classified. All the ratings contain the phrase "gemäß §14 JuSchG" (in accordance with §14 of the Youth Protection Law ), signifying that they are legally binding for minors. Cinemas may legally exhibit films without a classification but minors are prohibited from such screenings.

The FSK rating also limits the time of the day in which the movie may be aired on free-to-air TV stations to a time frame between 22:00 (FSK 16) or 23:00 (FSK 18) and 6:00. Stations are permitted to broadcast films not approved for audiences under 12 at their own discretion.

In Ghana, films are classified by the Film Classification Committee:

All publicly released films must be submitted to the Youth Committee for classification. There are four categories:

Films intended for public exhibition have to be submitted to the Director of Film, Newspaper and Article Administration, who is the Film Censorship Authority (FCA) under the Ordinance, for approval. Films approved for public exhibition are then either classified or exempted from classification.

Of the four levels, Categories I, II A , and II B are unrestricted. Only Category III is a restricted category and regulated by the government.

Hungarian ratings are decided by the National Media and Infocommunications Authority (NMHH):

All ratings are advisory except the "X" classification. The current one is the third motion picture rating system in Hungary. The first system existed between 1965 and 2004, and was administered by the Ministry for National Cultural Heritage and its predecessors. Its categories were "Without age restriction", "Not recommended below age of 14", "Above age of 16 only", and "Above age of 18 only". A second system was introduced in 2004 which was overhauled in 2011 in favour of the current system. Its categories—given by the National Film Office—were "Without age restriction", "Parental guidance suggested below age of 12", "Not recommended below age of 16", "Not recommended below age of 18", and "For adults only".

Since 1 July 2006, FRÍSK (short for Félag rétthafa í sjónvarps- og kvikmyndaiðnaði ) has replaced the Kvikmyndaskoðun system in Iceland. In October 2013, FRÍSK announced that it was adopting a new system similar to the Netherlands' Kijkwijzer at least through 2016. The Icelandic ratings system also provides an "18" rating in addition to the Kijkwijzer ratings. Under Icelandic law, minors aged 14-years-old and over may be admitted to a film carrying a higher age rating if accompanied by an adult. The ratings are as follows:

In India, Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) is responsible for certifying films meant for public exhibition.

Motion pictures shown in Indonesia must undergo reviewing by the Film Censorship Agency of the Republic of Indonesia ( Indonesian : Lembaga Sensor Film , LSF). Other than issuing certificates, the LSF also reviews and issues permits for film-related advertising, such as movie trailers and posters. LSF has the authority to cut scenes from films.  Films passed for exhibition are awarded one of the following classifications:

The Iraqi film rating system is declared by the Ministry of Information and Culture . It is against the law for an underage person to enter restricted films at the cinemas, even with their parents, where a proof of identity may be required.

All films that are exhibited in public or released on a home video format must be submitted for classification to the Irish Film Classification Office (IFCO).

In Italy the rating system of the films is currently disciplined by the Decreto legislativo n° 203 of 7 December 2017. For commercial release, distributors are requested to classify their films based on the age of the audience. Their decision is verified by a commission of the Ministry of Culture , composed of members of the film industry and experts in education and animal rights. Since 2021, the commission is no longer allowed to ban a film or demand edits. Films are classified into one of the following categories:

The classification only applies to commercial releases in theaters, and the law does not require classification of home media. Before 2021, films aimed to be shown in theatres were classified for all ages (T) or prohibited for children under 14 or 18 by the Commission for Film Review. The Commission could also ask for some scenes to be cut or ban the distribution of the film.

Film classification in Jamaica is a requirement of the Cinematograph Act of 1913, which also established the Cinematograph Authority.

A Japanese film rating regulator known as Eirin ( 映倫 ) [full-name: Ei ga Rin ri Kanri Iinkai ( 映画倫理管理委員会 ) ] has a film classification system under which films are classified into one of four categories. The categories have been in use since 1 May 1998.

In Kazakhstan, films are rated by the Committee for Culture of the Ministry for Culture and Information.

In Kenya, films are rated by the Kenya Film Classification Board .

In Kuwait, films are rated by the Censor Board Committee (لجنة الرقابة) under authority of the Ministry of Information (وزارة الإعلام). The Committee may sanction edits of or outright ban certain films in order to comply with cultural laws and values of Kuwait. The Ministry of Information originally established an age classifications system for films under decision number #73, article #10 of year 2012. The 2012 system rated films as either for "general audiences" (G) or for "persons aged 16 and above" (16+). c. 2015 , two additional classifications were introduced for films rated as "under 13 need to be accompanied with adults" (PG) or "adults only" (18+). However, by May 2016, the Ministry of Information established a new age classifications system for films under decision number #30 of year 2016. Therefore, as of May 2016, films in Kuwait are rated under the following:

Cinemas are legally obligated to refuse entry to any minor under the required age of any film's established age classification.

In Latvia, it is the duty of the producer of a film or distributor to assign a rating according to a pre-determined set of criteria. All publicly exhibited films, visual recordings and films broadcast over television and electronic networks must be classified.

Films released in Lebanon are rated by the Lebanese Censorship Board .

The Lithuanian Film Centre is a state institution under the Ministry of Culture of Lithuania. A film approved for public exhibition receives one of the ratings below based on its content:

Historically, film censorship in Malaysia was carried out by police under the Theatre Ordinance 1908. In 1954 the Film Censorship Board (LPF) was created to censor films distributed across Malaysia in accordance with the Cinematograph Films Act 1952, and later the Film Censorship Act 2002. Malaysia's motion picture rating system was introduced in 1953, initially classifying films either for General Audiences ( Tontonan Umum ) or For Adults Only ( Untuk Orang Dewasa Sahaja ), and in 1996 these classifications were changed to "U" and four different "18" categories (which were amalgamated back into a single classification in 2010). In 2008, the "PG13" classification was introduced, which admitted children under the age of 13 if accompanied by an adult ("PG13" underwent a cosmetic change to "P13" in 2012). In February 2023, the "P13" classification was split in two—a "P12" classification (effectively the same as "P13" but with a slightly lower age threshold) and a prohibitive "13" classification, which bars admission to children under the age of 13. A prohibitive "16" classification was also introduced, barring audiences under the age of 16.

Upon viewing the board will assign one of three categories to the film:

Should a film be approved, the Board then assigns the film a classification. As of 2023 the ratings are:

Film in the Maldives are classified by the National Bureau of Classification . Certificates issued are based on the following categories:

As of 2012, films in Malta are classified by the Film Board in accordance with the Malta Council for Culture and the Arts Act. As part of an overhaul in 2013 the "14" and "16" age classifications were replaced by "12A" and "15"; the "PG" rating was redefined while "U", "12" and "18" were retained in their existing form.

If the film is deemed "fit for exhibition" it will be awarded one of the following classifications:

The Film Classification Board (FCB) classifies films and stage plays on behalf of the Ministry of Arts and Cultural Heritage. Film will be awarded one of the following classifications in accordance with the Film Act 2002 or rejected.

The General Directorate of Radio, Television and Cinematography (in Spanish, Dirección General de Radio, Televisión y Cinematografía ) is the issuer of ratings for motion pictures. The RTC is an agency of the Secretariat of the Interior ( Secretaría de Gobernación ). It has its own classification system, as follows:

In the Netherlands, the Kijkwijzer system is used, which is executed by the Netherlands Institute for the Classification of Audiovisual Media (NICAM). Kijkwijzer is an advisory system for parents, but Dutch law also has a legal provision for public spaces, including cinemas. Children under the specified age limits are only admitted to films carrying an age limit of 6, 9, 12, or 14 if accompanied by an adult. In the case of "16" and "18" rated films, admission is legally prohibited for children under 16 years of age in both categories per section 240a of the Wetboek van Strafrecht.

There are also six descriptor icons used:

Mostly, these icons are used along with other symbols, displaying if a film contains violence, sexual content, frightening scenes, drug or alcohol abuse, discrimination, coarse language or dangerous challenges and stunts. These symbols are also used in television channels broadcasting under license issued in the Netherlands (independent from country for which the channel are dedicated).

The Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act 1993 gives the Office of Film and Literature Classification the power to classify publications into three categories: unrestricted, restricted, or "objectionable" (banned). With a few exceptions, films, videos, DVDs and restricted computer games must carry a label before being offered for supply or exhibited to the public.

In 2017 the Office of Film and Literature Classification created a special RP18 rating for online content in response to the Netflix television series, 13 Reasons Why . The new classification reflects concerns raised with 17 and 18 year olds in New Zealand being at a higher risk of suicide. The current ratings are:

The National Film and Video Censors Board classifies films, videos, DVDs, and VCDs. Classifications carrying an age rating are legally restricted, although the "15" and "18" classifications do not apply to people below 2 years of age. The categories are:

In Norway, all films—whether they are exhibited in cinemas, distributed on video, shown on television or streamed through on-demand services—are required by law to be classified. Films shown in cinemas must be classified by the distributor, and films made available by other means must be classified by whoever who has the rights to make them available in Norway. Classifications are mandated to follow the guidelines and age limits set by the Norwegian Media Authority ( Medietilsynet ). The law previously required films to be classified by the Norwegian Media Authority, but this was repealed in 2022.

The following age limits apply to films:

In the Philippines, motion pictures, along with television programs, are rated by the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board , a special agency of the Office of the President . As of 2012, the Board uses six classification ratings.

Independent, foreign-language and art-house films released in the Philippines are not rated by the MTRCB themselves but are instead rated through the Film Development Council of the Philippines . Nevertheless, the same rating system applies.

Movies are rated in Portugal by the Comissão de Classificação de Espectáculos of the Ministry of Culture . In cinemas the ratings are mandatory (subject to parental guidance) whereas for video releases they are merely advisory, except in the case of pornographic content. Children under the age of 4 were previously prohibited from public film performances, but a special category was introduced for this age group when the classification system was overhauled in 2014. A category for 14-year-olds was also introduced, and the lowest age rating was dropped from 4 years of age to 3. The categories are the following:

Ratings in Romania are set by the National Center of Cinematography ( Romanian : Centrul Național al Cinematografiei ) (CNC).

Since 2012, the rating appears inside circles, which indicate age restrictions followed by a plus(+), and appears in most shows, including TV and Internet shows in Russia.

The indication shown:

Film classification in Saudi Arabia is administered by the General Authority of Media Regulation (Gmedia; formerly known as the General Commission for Audiovisual Media or GCAM), after the reintroduction of film theatres in the country, as of 2017. GCAM (now Gmedia) officially approved a system in 2018, and revised it in 2022 to incorporate a "PG15" rating, which has later officially replaced the "R12" rating. The classifications are:

Film classification in Singapore was introduced on 1 July 1991 and comes under the jurisdiction of the Board of Film Censors (BFC), currently part of the Infocomm Media Development Authority (IMDA). There were three ratings originally: G (General), PG (Parental Guidance) and R (Restricted to 18 years and above). Prior to then films were either approved or effectively banned. Since then, there have been several alterations to the ratings over the years. In September 1991, a Restricted (Artistic) (R(A)) rating was introduced to replace the previous R-rating so as to allow the screening of certain art-house films which would otherwise have been banned without said rating, with an increased age restriction set at 21 years of age. The R(A) rating has since been replaced by NC16 (No Children under 16), M18 (Mature 18) and R21 (Restricted 21). A PG13 (Parental Guidance 13) rating, introduced in 2011, is the latest rating to be introduced. The G, PG and PG13 ratings are advisory while NC16, M18 and R21 carry age restrictions. Video ratings are mostly the same as the cinema ratings, except only go up to M18. Some titles, such as documentaries, children's programmes and sports programmes may be exempt from classification on video, but all titles must be classified for public theatrical exhibition.

The categories are:

In exceptional cases, a film may be refused classification if it either exceeds the permissible limits of the R21 classification, contains any material that undermines or is likely to undermine public order, or is likely to be prejudicial to national interest.

Jednotný systém označovania (English: Unified System of Age Rating/Labeling) ( JSO ) is a statutory board of Ministry of Culture of Slovakia under act 589/2007, which regulates age restriction of films , television programs and video games in Slovakia . In 2024, rating were once again updated, this time content descriptions were added and ratings -7, 7+, 12+ and 15+ were abolished.

The age ratings are:

The educational movie ratings, which have since been abolished, were:

New content descriptors and icons were added including:

In South Africa, films are classified by the Film and Publication Board . Distributors and exhibitors are legally compelled to comply with the age ratings. All broadcasters, cinemas and distributors of DVD/video and computer games must comply with the following:

There are also sub-descriptors used with some of the ratings:

The Korea Media Rating Board (영상물등급위원회) in Busan administers South Korea's film classification system. There are four general purpose ratings, comprising an "All" category for films that are suitable for all ages, and three age-restrictive categories: 12, 15 and 19. Children below the ages of 12 and 15 are admitted to 12- and 15-rated films respectively, if accompanied by an adult.  The 19-rating replaced the 18-rating on May 1st 2024; this change was retrospective, meaning that all films which were previously rated 18 had their former ratings withdrawn and uprated to 19. As with the previous classification minors are prohibited. A "restrictive" rating also exists which confines exhibition to specially licensed venues. The KMBR divides licensed films into the following categories:

Classification ratings are determined by the following:

All films to be commercially released in Spain in any medium must be submitted to the ICAA (Instituto de Cinematografía y Artes Audiovisuales - Cinematography and Audiovisual Arts Institute). Classifications are advisory except for X-rated films, which are restricted to specially licensed venues. A supplementary classification, "Especialmente Recomendada para la Infancia" (Especially recommended for children), is sometimes appended to the lowest two classifications. Another supplementary classification, "Especialmente recomendada para el fomento de la igualdad de género" (Especially recommended for the promotion of gender equality), is sometimes appended to any of the classifications except the last one.

The Swedish Media Council ("Statens medieråd") is a government agency with the aims to reduce the risk of harmful media influences among minors and to empower minors as conscious media users. The classification bestowed on a film should not be viewed as recommendations on the suitability for children, as the law the council operates under ( SFS 2010:1882) only mandates them to assess the relative risk to children's well-being. It is not a legal requirement to submit a film to the Media Council. The councils classification only applies to public exhibition, and the law does not require classification of home media.

The following categories are used:

Switzerland has adopted Germany's Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle der Filmwirtschaft (Voluntary Self-Regulation of the Film Industry, FSK). Under Swiss law, however, children up to two years younger than the age recommendations will be admitted if accompanied by a person invested with parental authority.

From 1994 until 2015, the Government Information Office (GIO) classified films into four categories (General Audience/Protected/Parental Guidance/Restricted) pursuant to its issued Regulations Governing the Classification of Motion Pictures of the Republic of China ( 電影片分級處理辦法 in traditional Chinese): The "Parental Guidance" rating previously prohibited viewing by children under the age of 12 and required adolescents aged 12–17 to be accompanied by an adult. In 2015, the "Parental Guidance" rating was further divided into two categories: one that prohibits children under the age of 12 and one that prohibits adolescents under the age of 15.

A motion picture rating system was proposed in the Film and Video Act of 2007, and was passed on December 20, 2007 by the Thai military -appointed National Legislative Assembly , replacing laws which had been in place since 1930. The draft law was met with resistance from the film industry and independent filmmakers. Activists had hoped for a less-restrictive approach; however, films are still subject to censorship, or can be banned from release altogether if the film is deemed to "undermine or disrupt social order and moral decency, or might impact national security or the pride of the nation".

The ratings were put into effect in August 2009. They are as follows:

In Turkey, movies to be shown in cinemas are rated by the Evaluation and Classification Board of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism . All films to be made commercially available must be classified, except in the case of educational films which are labeled as "for educational purposes" instead. The board also has the power to refuse classification in extreme cases (producers and distributors can submit an edited version of a movie to the board but edited versions may also be rejected if still deemed inappropriate); in this case, the movie will be banned with the exception of special artistic activities like fairs, festivals, feasts and carnivals.

In addition to the age ratings, content is also assessed for violence/horror, sexuality and negative examples i.e. drugs, vulgar and slang language.

The Ukrainian State Film Agency is the central executive body of cinematography in Ukraine. The Ratings issued by the Derzhkino are:

The United Arab Emirates has had a form of an age rating system for theatrical films since circa early 1980s, established under the federal 1980 Press and Publications Law, and originally authorised by the Ministry of Information and Culture (1972–2006). The National Media Council , established in 2006 when the ministry was eventually dissolved, would continue practising categorising films by perceiving content until February 2018, when it officially re-established the film age rating system under new guidelines, whilst also introducing new age rating systems for video games and print publications.

In June 2021, the Ministry of Culture and Youth launched the Media Regulatory Office to execute a number of functions and tasks previously under the National Media Council, following a restructure of the federal U.A.E. government that was approved in July 2020. This made the Media Regulatory Office the current authority for age ratings in the U.A.E. as of June 2021.

As of December 2021, the following are the official classifications used for films in the U.A.E.:

The British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) classifies films to be publicly exhibited in the United Kingdom, although statutory powers remain with local councils which can overrule any of the BBFC's decisions. Since 1984, the BBFC also classifies films made commercially available through a home video format. If the BBFC refuses a classification this effectively amounts to a ban (although local councils retain the legal right to overturn it in the case of cinema exhibition). The BBFC's regulatory powers do not extend to the Internet, so a film they have banned on physical media can still be made available via streaming media / video on demand . Videos designed to inform, educate or instruct or concerned with sport, religion or music are exempt from classification; exempt films may be marked as "E", but this is not an official label.

The current BBFC system is:

Older video works still in circulation may still carry the deprecated Uc label, classifying the work as "Especially suitable for pre-school children".

In the United States, film classification is a voluntary process with the ratings issued by the Motion Picture Association (MPA) via the Classification and Rating Administration (CARA). The system was established in 1968, but the version listed below is the most recent revision, having been in effect since 1996. An unrated film is often informally denoted by "NR" in newspapers and so forth.

Age ratings are divided into several categories. The age that corresponds to the category and the level of enforcement is defined by municipality ordinances.

In the San Cristóbal municipality the following ratings apply:

In the Baruta municipality the following ratings apply:

In the Maracaibo municipality children under the age of two are not admitted to performances and the ratings are enforced:

All theatrical releases are screened by the Cinema Department of the Ministry of Culture, Sport and Travel of Vietnam to ensure suitability for public viewing. Regardless of the rating, some scenes may be altered or removed to comply with regulations. The classification was revised in 2022 to incorporate a parental accompaniment rating.

The current ratings are: