Inertial Fusion Energy is a proposed approach to building a nuclear fusion power plant based on performing inertial confinement fusion at industrial scale.  This approach to fusion power is still in a research phase.  ICF first developed shortly after the development of the laser in 1960, but was a classified US research program during its earliest years.  In 1972, John Nuckolls wrote a paper predicting that compressing a target could create conditions where fusion reactions are chained together, a process known as fusion ignition or a burning plasma. On August 8, 2021, the NIF at Livermore National Laboratory became the first ICF facility in the world to demonstrate this (see plot). This breakthrough drove the US Department of Energy to create an Inertial Fusion Energy program in 2022 with a budget of 3 million dollars in its first year.

This kind of fusion reactor would consist of two parts:

Net energy in ICF comes from getting fusion reactions to chain together in a process known as ignition. To get there we need to squeeze material to hot and dense conditions for long enough.  But a key problem is that after a plasma becomes hot - it becomes hard to compress. The goal then is to avoid getting material hot until after it is compressed.  In literature, this is known as the low adiabatic approach to compression.  These steps are outlined below:

Several compression approaches attempt to do this including: Central Hot Spot Ignition, Fast Ignition, Shock Ignition and Magneto-inertial-fusion.

This program was originally established as a way to develop Nuclear weapons , because ICF mimics the compression physics of a fission-fusion bomb. These facilities have been built around the world, below are some examples.

There have also been multiple ICF facilities built, tested and decommissioned in the past.  For example, Sandia National Laboratory pursued a series (<10 machines) of ion-beam and electron-beam driven ICF research program through the 1970s and into the middle 1980s. Alternatively, Los Alamos built a large, excimer laser facility called Aurora in the late 1980s. Livermore National Laboratory built a succession of laser facilities including Nova, Cyclops, 4-PI, SHIVA and other devices.  As part of the run up to the NIF opening and achieving ignition, Livermore National Laboratory funded a body of research around the Laser Inertial Fusion Energy program.  Under this program, a reactor design was developed, costing, reactor chambers and energy capture programs were explored.

IFE development has come in waves within the United States.  Below are some government programs that have been funded over the years to push this technology forward:

It is still unclear which driver would work best for an IFE power plant, with supporters of different drivers pushing their favorite approach. Lasers have thus far proven to be the most well researched.  Below is a summary of the laser drivers that have been studied.  The challenge with implementing laser systems does not just come from the beam, but also the optics, mirrors, amplifiers and gratings that are also needed to put this system in place.

Depending on the driver that is being used there are key related technologies that need to be matured; below are some of these:

There are many kinds of targets that have been developed for ICF research - but a power plant would require thousands if not millions of identical targets to be fired repeatedly.  This will be exceedingly challenging.  At present, the Department of Energy contracts with General Atomics to produce ICF targets for the national laboratories.  These targets are partially built at GA and then shipped across the country to the ICF facility for a shot day.  The Laboratories maintain hardware and staff onsite to complete the last steps to prepare the targets for a shot.

There are several ways to get tritium and deuterium into an already-made capsule.  High pressure fills work by putting the shells in a chamber with 1 to 100 Atm of gas pressure and having the gas diffuse into the shell. Cryogenic foam shells work can work by wicking in the liquid DT fluid into the foam.  This involves getting the delicate shell down in temperature and pressure without damaging it.  This is a stepwise process that can take hours to days in time and requires multiple containment chambers and various kinds of pumps.  At cryogenic temperatures, the DT gas forms into a fluid which can be wicked into the foam shell.  Once filled, operators slowly lower the temperature further to form the ice crystal.  Ice can start formation around the equator of the target and then grow into a complete crystal. The ice is embedded with the foam shell structure.  Engineers have had problems with ice cracking during this formation process – all of which impacts the performance of the shot.  Monitoring of all of this is done using shadow grams, 360 X-ray diagnostics, visual inspection, and other tools; information is all run through software that gets a complete picture of the target during filling.

Keeping an ICF frozen at cryogenic temperatures while delivering it to the chamber for a shot is challenging.  For example, at the Laboratory for Laser Energetics the frozen target is held inside a custom-built, mobile cryogenic cart that can be moved into position under the target chamber.  The cart has a coolant system and vacuum pump to keep the material cold.  This cart holds the frozen target at the end of a "cold finger" which is then raised on an elevator and positioned at the center of the chamber. When the metal shroud is removed, the cryogenic target is exposed to room temperatures and starts to sublimate immediately into gas.  This means that laser pulses must coordinate directly with the exposure of the target and everything has to happen quickly to keep the target from melting.