Inkscape is a free and open-source vector graphics editor for traditional Unix-compatible systems such as GNU / Linux , BSD derivatives and Illumos , as well as Windows and macOS . It offers a rich set of features and is widely used for both artistic and technical illustrations such as cartoons, clip art, logos, typography, diagramming and flowcharting. It uses vector graphics to allow for sharp printouts and renderings at unlimited resolution and is not bound to a fixed number of pixels like raster graphics. Inkscape uses the standardized Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) file format as its main format, which is supported by many other applications including web browsers. It can import and export various other file formats, including SVG , AI , EPS , PDF , PS and PNG .

Inkscape can render primitive vector shapes (e.g. rectangles , ellipses , polygons , arcs, spirals , stars and 3D boxes) and text. These objects may be filled with solid colors, patterns, radial or linear color gradients and their borders may be stroked, both with adjustable transparency. Embedding and optional tracing of raster graphics is also supported, enabling the editor to create vector graphics from photos and other raster sources. Created shapes can be further manipulated with transformations, such as moving, rotating, scaling and skewing.

Inkscape began in 2003 as a code fork of the Sodipodi project. Sodipodi, developed since 1999, was itself based on Raph Levien 's Gill (GNOME Illustration Application). One of the main priorities of the Inkscape project was interface consistency and usability by following the GNOME human interface guidelines .

Inkscape FAQ interprets the word Inkscape as a compound of ink and -scape .

Four former Sodipodi developers (Ted Gould, Bryce Harrington, Nathan Hurst, and MenTaLguY ) led the fork, citing differences over project objectives, openness to third-party contributions, and technical disagreements. They said that Inkscape would focus development on implementing the complete SVG standard, whereas Sodipodi development emphasized developing a general-purpose vector graphics editor, possibly at the expense of SVG.

Following the fork, Inkscape's developers changed the programming language from C to C++ ; adopted the GTK (formerly GIMP Toolkit) toolkit C++ bindings ( gtkmm ); redesigned its user interface , and added a number of new features. Inkscape's implementation of the SVG standard, although incomplete, has shown gradual improvement.

Since 2005, Inkscape has participated in the Google Summer of Code program.

Up until the end of November 2007, Inkscape's source code repository was hosted by SourceForge . Thereafter it moved to Launchpad . In June 2017, it moved to GitLab .

Inkscape workflow is based around vector objects. Tools allow manipulating primitive vector shapes: simple ones like rectangles, ellipses and arcs, as well as more complex objects like 3D boxes with adjustable perspectives, stars, polygons and spirals. Rendering feature that can create objects like barcodes , calendars, grids, gears and roulette curves (using the spirograph tool). These objects may be filled with solid colors, patterns, radial or linear color gradients and their borders may be stroked, both with adjustable transparency. All of those can be further edited by transformations—such as moving, rotating, scaling and skewing—or by editing paths.

Other tools allow creating Bézier curves , freehand drawing of lines (pencil), or calligraphic (brush-like) strokes which support a graphics tablet .

Inkscape is able to write and edit text with tools available for changing font, spacing, kerning, rotation, flowing along the path or into a shape. Text can be converted to paths for further editing. The program also has layers (as well as objects) feature that allows the user to organize objects in a preferred stacking order in the canvas. Objects can be made visible/invisible and locked/unlocked through these features.

Symbol libraries enable Inkscape to use existing symbols like logic-gate symbols or DOT pictograms . Additional libraries can be included by the user.

Inkscape supports image tracing , the process of extracting vector graphics from raster sources.

Clones are child objects of an original parent object. Different transformations can be applied to them, such as: size, position, rotation, blur, opacity , color and symmetry. Clones are updated live whenever the parent object changes.

Every object in the drawing can be subjected to arbitrary affine transformations : moving, rotating, scaling, skewing and a configurable matrix . Transformation parameters can be specified numerically. Transformations can snap to angles, grids, guidelines and nodes of other objects, or be aligned in specified direction, spaced equally, scattered at random.

Objects can be grouped together. Groups of objects behave similarly to objects. Objects in a group can be edited without having to ungroup them first.

The Z-order determines the order in which objects are drawn on the canvas. Objects with a high Z-order are drawn on top of objects lower in the Z-order. Order of objects can be managed either using layers, or by manually moving the object up and down in the Z-order. Layers can be locked or hidden, preventing modifying and accidental selection.

The Create Tiled Clones tool allows symmetrical or grid-like drawings using various plane symmetries .

Appearance of objects can be further changed by using masks and clipping paths , which can be created from arbitrary objects, including groups.

The style attributes are 'attached' to the source object, so after cutting/copying an object onto the clipboard, the style's attributes can be pasted to another object.

Objects can also be moved by manually entering the location coordinates in the top toolbar. Even additions and subtractions can be done this way.

Inkscape has a comprehensive tool set to edit paths (as they are the basic element of a vector file):

Inkscape includes a feature called Live Path Effects (LPE), which can apply various modifiers to a path. Envelope Deformation is available via the Path Effects and provides a perspective effect. There are more than a dozen of these live path effects. LPE can be stacked onto a single object and have interactive live on canvas and menu-based editing of the effects.

Inkscape's primary format is SVG 1.1 , meaning that it can create and edit with the abilities and within the constraints of this format. Any other format must either be imported (converted to SVG) or exported (converted from SVG). The SVG format is using the Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) standard internally. Inkscape's implementation of SVG and CSS standards is incomplete. Most notably, it does not support animation natively. Inkscape has multilingual support, particularly for complex scripts . Formats that used the UniConvertor library are not supported beyond the 1.0 release. A workaround is to have a parallel installation of version 0.92.x.

The latest version of Inkscape 1.0.x (and older line 0.92.x) is available for Linux , Windows 7+, and macOS 10.11–10.15 platforms. Inkscape is packaged with AppImage, Flatpak, PPA, Snap and source by all major Linux distributions (including Debian , Ubuntu , Fedora , OpenSUSE ) with GTK+ 3.24+ (0.92.x with GTK+ 2.20+ for older Linux).

Inkscape can also be installed via FreeBSD ports and pkgsrc , the latter being native to NetBSD, but well-supported on most POSIX platforms, including GNU / Linux , Illumos , and macOS .

As of 2017 , Wacom tablet support for GTK 3 is in a reviving project. Version 1.0.x includes GTK 3 and Wacom support depending necessary Wacom Linux or Unix driver.

An issue had affected all GTK3 based apps on macOS Ventura (macOS 13), making the app unresponsive to certain mouse events. GTK is used by many different programs. GTK is a free and open-source cross-platform widget toolkit for creating graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Inkscape 1.2.2 was also affected and the web site of Inkscape recommended not to install it on Ventura as long as a stable solution was not available. These issues were fixed from version 1.3.

Most of the compatibility issues with Apple silicon processors (M1, M2 and M3 families) appear to have also been resolved from version 1.3 and the macOS download site for Inkscape offers two options: the Intel version and the arm64 corresponding to the Apple Silicon M family.

In its 2012 Best of Open Source Software Awards, InfoWorld gave Inkscape an award for being one of the best open-source desktop applications, commending its typographic controls and ability to directly edit the XML text of its documents.

PC Magazine ' s February 2019 review was rather mixed, giving the application three out of five. It criticized the interface's graphics and lack of optimization for stylus support, the application's poor interoperability with other graphics editors, unwieldy text formatting controls, and the quality of the Mac version. However, it did praise the ability to add custom filters and extensions, the Inkscape community's passion for creating and sharing them, and the precise path and placement tools. The review concluded that whilst Inkscape "boasts outstanding features and a passionate user base for a free program ... it's not suitable for busy professionals."

In January 2020, TechRadar gave Inkscape a positive rating of four stars out of five. It lauded the wide range of editing tools and support for many file formats, but noted that the application's processing can be slow. It considered Inkscape to be a good free alternative to proprietary graphics editors such as Adobe Illustrator .

According to It's FOSS in July 2023 the 1.3 release of Inkscape mainly focuses on making the user's workflow more organized to work more efficiently, with some new features making it a better alternative to Adobe Illustrator .