IOP Publishing (previously Institute of Physics Publishing ) is the publishing company of the Institute of Physics . It provides publications through which scientific research is distributed worldwide, including journals, community websites, magazines, conference proceedings and books. The Institute of Physics is a scientific charity devoted to increasing the practice, understanding and application of physics . Any financial surplus earned by IOP Publishing goes to support physics through the activities of the Institute .

The main IOP Publishing headquarters is located in Bristol , England, and the North American headquarters is in Philadelphia , United States. It also has regional offices in, Mexico City , Beijing , Tokyo , and Sydney . It employs over 400 staff.

It was the first physics publisher to publish a journal on the internet . In 1994, the journal Classical and Quantum Gravity was published as a TeX file. In January 1996 the organization launched the full electronic journals programme on the World Wide Web , ahead of other physics publishers.

Physics World , the monthly magazine of the Institute of Physics, was first published in October 1988. The title, published by IOP Publishing, won in the App/Digital Edition category for Association/Non-Profit (B-to-B) brands in the Eddie Digital Awards. It also picked up an honourable mention for best Design Cover in the Association/Non-Profit (B-to-B) category in the Ozzie Awards.

IOPscience is the online service for journal content. Journals include:

Some of these journals are published on behalf of other societies; for example, the Astrophysical Journal group of titles are published in partnership with the American Astronomical Society .

IOP Publishing sold its books publishing division (with the imprint Adam Hilger ) to Taylor & Francis in 2005. As a consequence of recent significant changes in the publishing landscape and demand for ebooks, IOP Publishing launched an ebook programme in 2012. IOP Publishing partnered with Morgan & Claypool on a book programme which is focussed on researchers who are in the early stages of their research careers or who would like to approach a research field more broadly and across disciplines. In 2014 IOP Publishing and the American Astronomical Society announced an electronic book publishing partnership as part of the AAS's mission to enhance and share humanity’s scientific understanding of the universe.