A landscape architect is a person who is educated in the field of landscape architecture . The practice of landscape architecture includes: site analysis, site inventory, site planning , land planning, planting design, grading, storm water management, sustainable design , construction specification, and ensuring that all plans meet the current building codes and local and federal ordinances.

The practice of landscape architecture dates to some of the earliest of human cultures and just as much as the practice of medicine has been inimical to the species and ubiquitous worldwide for several millennia. However, this article examines the modern profession and educational discipline of those practicing the design of landscape architecture.

In the 1700s, Humphry Repton described his occupation as "landscape gardener" on business cards he had prepared to represent him in work that now would be described as that of a landscape architect.

The title, "landscape architect", was first used by Frederick Law Olmsted , the designer of New York City's Central Park in Manhattan and numerous projects of large scale both public and private. He was the founder of a firm of landscape architects who employed highly skilled professionals to design and execute aspects of projects designed under his auspices.

Depending on the jurisdiction, landscape architects who pass state requirements to become registered, licensed, or certified may be entitled to use the postnominal letters PLA. In the US, all 50 states have adopted licensure. The American Society of Landscape Architects endorses the postnominal letters PLA, for Professional Landscape Architect.

The Australian Institute of Landscape Architects (AILA) states that "Landscape Architects research, plan, design, and advise on the stewardship, conservation, and sustainability of development of the environment and spaces, both within and beyond the built environment". This definition of the profession of landscape architect is based on the International Standard Classification of Occupations, International Labour Office, Geneva .

Some notable Australian landscape architects include Catherin Bull , Kevin Taylor , Richard Weller , Peter Spooner , Sydney based writer and designer (Doris) Jocelyn Brown , Grace Fraser , Bruce Mackenzie, Mary Jeavons, Janet Conrad, Dr Jim Sinatra, William Guilfoyle , Ina Higgins , Edna Walling , and Ellis Stones .

To become a recognised professional landscape architect in Australia, the first requirement is to obtain a degree in landscape architecture accredited by the Australian Institute of Landscape Architects . After at least two years of recognised professional practice, graduates may submit for further assessment to obtain full professional recognition by AILA.

The Canadian Society of Landscape Architects (CSLA) is the country's professional association of landscape architects. Some notable Canadian landscape architects include Cornelia Oberlander , Claude Cormier , Peter Jacobs , Janet Rosenberg , Marc Ryan, and Michael Hough.

The Landscape Institute is the recognised body relating to the field of Landscape Architecture throughout the United Kingdom. To become a recognised landscape architect in the UK takes approximately seven years. To begin the process, one has to study an accredited course by the Landscape Institute to obtain a bachelor's degree in landscape architecture or a similar field. Following this one must progress onto a postgraduate diploma in the field of landscape architecture covering the subject in far greater detail such as mass urban planning, construction, and planting. Following this, the trainee must complete the Pathway to Chartership, a challenging program set out by the Landscape Institute. Following this, one is awarded a full landscape architect title and membership among the Chartered Members of the Landscape Institute (CMLI).

The United States is the founding country of the formal profession entitled landscape architecture. Those in this field work both to create an aesthetically pleasing setting and also to protect and preserve the environment in an area. In the U.S., a need to formalize the practice and a name for the profession was resolved in 1899 with the formation of the American Society of Landscape Architects . A few of the many talented and influential landscape architects who have been based in the United States are: Frederick Law Olmsted , Beatrix Farrand , Jens Jensen , Ian McHarg , Thomas Church , Arthur Shurtleff , Ellen Biddle Shipman John Nolen , Lawrence Halprin , Charles Edgar Dickinson , Iris Miller , and Robert Royston .

Royston summed up one American theme:

Landscape architecture practices the fine art of relating the structure of culture to the nature of landscape, to the end that people can use it, enjoy it, and preserve it.

The following is an outline of the typical scope of service for a landscape architect: