A longitudinal study (or longitudinal survey , or panel study ) is a research design that involves repeated observations of the same variables (e.g., people) over long periods of time (i.e., uses longitudinal data ). It is often a type of observational study , although it can also be structured as longitudinal randomized experiment .

Longitudinal studies are often used in social-personality and clinical psychology , to study rapid fluctuations in behaviors, thoughts, and emotions from moment to moment or day to day; in developmental psychology , to study developmental trends across the life span; and in sociology , to study life events throughout lifetimes or generations; and in consumer research and political polling to study consumer trends. The reason for this is that, unlike cross-sectional studies , in which different individuals with the same characteristics are compared, longitudinal studies track the same people, and so the differences observed in those people are less likely to be the result of cultural differences across generations, that is, the cohort effect . Longitudinal studies thus make observing changes more accurate and are applied in various other fields. In medicine, the design is used to uncover predictors of certain diseases. In advertising, the design is used to identify the changes that advertising has produced in the attitudes and behaviors of those within the target audience who have seen the advertising campaign. Longitudinal studies allow social scientists to distinguish short from long-term phenomena, such as poverty . If the poverty rate is 10% at a point in time, this may mean that 10% of the population are always poor or that the whole population experiences poverty for 10% of the time.

Longitudinal studies can be retrospective (looking back in time, thus using existing data such as medical records or claims database) or prospective (requiring the collection of new data).

Cohort studies are one type of longitudinal study which sample a cohort (a group of people who share a defining characteristic, typically who experienced a common event in a selected period, such as birth or graduation) and perform cross-section observations at intervals through time. Not all longitudinal studies are cohort studies; some instead include a group of people who do not share a common event.

As opposed to observing an entire population, a panel study follows a smaller, selected group - called a 'panel'.

When longitudinal studies are observational , in the sense that they observe the state of the world without manipulating it, it has been argued that they may have less power to detect causal relationships than experiments . Others say that because of the repeated observation at the individual level, they have more power than cross-sectional observational studies, by virtue of being able to exclude time-invariant unobserved individual differences and also of observing the temporal order of events.

Longitudinal studies do not require large numbers of participants (as in the examples below). Qualitative longitudinal studies may include only a handful of participants, and longitudinal pilot or feasibility studies often have fewer than 100 participants.

Longitudinal studies are time-consuming and expensive.

Longitudinal studies cannot avoid an attrition effect: that is, some subjects cannot continue to participate in the study for various reasons. Under longitudinal research methods, the reduction in the research sample will bias the remaining smaller sample.

Practice effect is also one of the problems: longitudinal studies tend to be influenced because subjects repeat the same procedure many times (potentially introducing autocorrelation ), and this may cause their performance to improve or deteriorate.