The Magic Mouse is a multi-touch wireless mouse sold by Apple Inc. and manufactured by Foxconn . The first-generation Magic Mouse was released on October 20, 2009, and introduced multi-touch functionality to a computer mouse. Taking after the iPhone , iPod Touch , and multi-touch MacBook trackpads , the Magic Mouse allows the use of multi-touch gestures and inertia scrolling across the surface of the mouse, designed for use with macOS .

The second-generation Magic Mouse (initially marketed as Magic Mouse 2 ) was released on October 13, 2015, removing the use of AA batteries, instead including a lithium-ion rechargeable battery , and a Lightning port for charging and pairing, and was later made fully compatible with iPadOS .

The first generation Magic Mouse was released on October 20, 2009, and introduced multi-touch functionality. It connects wirelessly to a Mac computer via Bluetooth . It is powered by two AA batteries , and operates using a solid-state laser tracking sensor like the previous-generation wireless Mighty Mouse . Apple includes two non-rechargeable batteries in the box. Until 2016, Apple sold a battery charger that included two rechargeable NiMH AA batteries, designed for use with Mac peripherals.

Like its predecessor, the Mighty Mouse , the Magic Mouse includes support for secondary click. The Magic Mouse has been included with most desktop Mac computers since its introduction, including the iMac , iMac Pro , and third-generation Mac Pro , as well as being available as a standalone purchase.

The Magic Mouse borrows design elements from the preceding Apple Pro Mouse , notably its seamless "zero-button" design and translucent acrylic surface for 360-degree scrolling, replacing the rubber scroll ball on the Mighty Mouse. The mouse does not support left and right-clicking simultaneously, and also removes the ability to middle click without third-party software workarounds.

The second generation Magic Mouse was introduced in October 2015, alongside the Magic Keyboard and second-generation Magic Trackpad . A space gray color was introduced with the iMac Pro in 2017, and was later made available as a standalone purchase. iPadOS 13.4 introduced mouse support to iPads for the first time, and supports all functionality of the second generation Magic Mouse.

A variety of pastel colors were introduced in 2021 to match the colors of the M1 iMac . Additionally, standalone purchases include a USB-C to Lightning cable, instead of USB-A to Lightning. The space gray color was replaced by a black color with a silver aluminum finish in 2022, which was originally only available bundled with the third-generation Mac Pro . All colors of the second-generation Magic Mouse have been introduced alongside matching colors for various Magic Keyboard models.

Initial reception to the Magic Mouse was mixed, with reactions to its inability to trigger Exposé , Dashboard , or Spaces , as its predecessor could, or to middle click . Later versions of Mac OS X include gestures to open Mission Control , which incorporates functionality from Exposé, Dashboard, and Spaces. Other issues included the mouse's unstable connection to the first and second-generation Mac Pro models, and its low-profile design being uncomfortable & unergonomic was causing palm-aches, and hand cramping for some users.

The Lightning charging port is located on the bottom of the mouse, rendering it unusable while charging. This was a design choice that was widely criticized by reviewers. Critics have also noted the omission of Force Touch technology, compared to the second-generation Magic Trackpad.