The Master of Architecture ( M.Arch or MArch ) is a professional degree in architecture qualifying the graduate to move through the various stages of professional accreditation ( internship , exams) that result in receiving a license.

The degree is earned through several possible paths of study, depending on both a particular program's construction, and the candidate's previous academic experience and degrees.  M.Arch degrees vary in kind, so they are frequently given names such as "M.Arch I" and "M.Arch II" to distinguish them.  All M.Arch degrees are professional degrees in architecture.  There are, however, other master's degrees offered by architecture schools that are not accredited in any way.

Many schools offer several possible tracks of architectural education.  Including study at the bachelor's and master's level, these tracks range up to 7.5 years in duration.

Some institutions offer a 5-year professional degree program. Depending on the school and course of study, this could be either a Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch) or an M.Arch.  In the U.S., it is typically a 5-year B.Arch  Either degree qualifies those who complete it to sit for the ARE (the Architectural Registration Exam , the architecture equivalent of the bar exam), which leads to an architect's license in the U.S..  One disadvantage of the B.Arch degree is that it is rarely considered as sufficient qualification for teaching architecture at the university/college level in the U.S. (though there are many exceptions).  Many architects who wish to teach and have only received a B.Arch choose to pursue a 3-semester master's degree (not an M.Arch) to obtain further academic qualification.

Graduate-level architecture programs consist of course work in design, building science , structural engineering , architectural history , theory, professional practice, and elective courses. For those without any prior knowledge of the field, coursework in calculus, physics, computers, statics and strengths of materials, architectural history, studio, and building science is usually required. Some architecture programs allow students to specialize in a specific aspect of architecture, such as architectural technologies or digital media . A thesis or final project is usually required to graduate.

In the United States , The National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB) is the sole accrediting body for professional degree programs in architecture. Since most state registration boards in the United States require any applicant for licensure to have graduated from an NAAB-accredited program, obtaining such a degree is an essential aspect of preparing for the professional practice of architecture. First time students matriculating with a 5-year B.Arch degree can also qualify for registration without obtaining a master's degree. Some programs offer a concurrent learning model, allowing students the opportunity to work in the profession while they earn their degree, so that they can test for licensure immediately upon graduation.

In Canada, Master of Architecture degrees may be accredited by the Canadian Architectural Certification Board (CACB), allowing the recipient to qualify for both the ARE and the Examination for Architects in Canada (ExAC).

As of June 2022, there were 120 accredited Master of Architecture programs in the United States, including Puerto Rico.

Colleges and universities in Canada with accredited Master of Architecture degree programs are listed below:

Universities in Australia and New Zealand with accredited Master of Architecture degree programs are listed below Architects Accreditation Council Of Australia « Recognised Architecture Qualifications :

The only 2 universities offering HKIA ( Hong Kong Institute of Architects ), CAA ( Commonwealth Association of Architects ) & RIBA ( Royal Institute of British Architects ) accredited Master of Architecture for architect professional registration.

In Mexico, an officially recognized Bachelor of Architecture is sufficient for practice.

Federal University of Technology, Minna. Nigeria.

Some universities in India with accredited Master of Architecture degree programs are listed below:
School of Architecture, Bharath University

Some universities in Iran with accredited Master of Architecture degree programs are listed below:

(M.Arch. language: English) (Poland)

All M.Arch courses listed below comply with RIBA and ARB accreditation, complying to RIBA's Part 2 stage before Part 3 and Architect registry.

England

Northern Ireland

Scotland

Wales

King Saud University, college of architecture and planning ( Riyadh, Saudi Arabia)
B.Arch main major:

And there's master's degree and PHD

Language: English, Arabic

Rank (according to NAAB 2012) #1 architecture school in middle east