A miner is a person who extracts ore , coal , chalk , clay , or other minerals from the earth through mining . There are two senses in which the term is used. In its narrowest sense, a miner is someone who works at the rock face ; cutting, blasting, or otherwise working and removing the rock. In a broader sense, a "miner" is anyone working within a mine, not just a worker at the rock face.

Renowned as one of the most dangerous jobs in the world - and for good reason. Cave-
ins, explosions, toxic air, and extreme temperatures are some of the most perilous
hazards observed to take place in underground mining. In some countries, miners lack social guarantees and in case of injury may be left to cope without assistance.

In regions with a long mining tradition, many communities have developed cultural traditions and aspects specific to the various regions, in the forms of particular equipment, symbolism, music, and the like.

Different functions of the individual miner. Many of the roles are specific to a type of mining, such as coal mining.
Roles considered to be "miners" in the narrower sense have included:

Other roles within mines that did not involve breaking rock (and thus fit the broader definition) have included:

In addition to miners working in the seam, a mine employs other workers in duties in the sea. In addition to the office staff of various sorts, these may include:

Mining engineers use the principles of math and science to develop philosophical solutions to technical problems for miners.
In most cases, a bachelor's degree in engineering, mining engineering or geological engineering is required. Because technology is constantly changing, miners and mining engineers need to continue their education.

The basics of mining engineering includes finding, extracting, and preparing minerals, metals and coal. These mined products are used for electric power generation and manufacturing industries. Mining engineers also supervise the construction of underground mine operations and create ways to transport the extracted minerals to processing plants.