A minibus , microbus , or minicoach is a passenger-carrying motor vehicle that is designed to carry more people than a multi-purpose vehicle or minivan , but fewer people than a full-size bus . In the United Kingdom , the word "minibus" is used to describe any full-sized passenger-carrying van or panel truck . Minibuses have a seating capacity of between 12 and 30. Larger minibuses may be called midibuses . Minibuses are typically front engine step-in vehicles, although low floor minibuses are particularly common in Japan.

It is unknown when the first minibus vehicle was developed. For example, Ford Model T vehicles were modified for passenger transport by early bus companies and entrepreneurs. Ford produced a version during the 1920s to carry up to 12 people. In the Soviet Union , the production of minibuses began in the mid-1950s, among the first mass-produced minibuses were the RAF-10, UAZ -451B, and Start. Since September 1961, the RAF-977D "Latvia" minibus began to be mass-produced.

There are many different form of public transportation services around the world that are provided by using vehicles that can be considered as minibus:

Some countries may require an additional class of driving licence over a normal private car licence, and some may require a full commercial driving licence . The need for such a licence may depend on:

In the UK the following information regarding Minibus driving licences is important:
"The holder of an ordinary car driving licence which was obtained prior to January 1997, once aged 21 years minimum, may drive a Minibus with a capacity of 16 passengers. Where the "ordinary car driving licence" is obtained after December 1996, they will have to take a separate test to drive a vehicle with a capacity of more than 8 passengers. However, there is an exemption for certain volunteer drivers, where the vehicle does not exceed 3500 kg GVW (or 4250 kg GVW if the vehicle is designed to be wheelchair accessible). Driving licence source

A driving licence issued in Ontario , Canada, for an equivalent of a UK class B or class B-auto driving licence (in the case of Ontario, a class G licence) , allows its holder to drive vehicles with:

Anyone wanting to drive a vehicle in Ontario, with the same MAM limits as for class G vehicles, with fewer than 25, but at least 10, passenger seats, must obtain a bus licence.  This licence will allow, for example, its holder to drive 12- and 15-passenger vans] that Transport Canada defines as large passenger vans.