The World Federation of Engineering Organizations ( French : Federation Mondiale des Organisations d'Ingenieurs ; WFEO ) is an international, non-governmental organization representing the engineering profession worldwide.

Founded in 1968 by a group of regional engineering organizations, under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organizations ( UNESCO ) in Paris, WFEO is a non governmental international organization that brings together national engineering organizations from over 90 nations and represents some 20 million engineers from around the world.
WFEO is part of the United Nations system as an NGO in official relations with UNESCO (associate status) since its foundation, and as taking part in the work of its main bodies, mainly the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and its specialized agencies, notably the United Nations Industrial Development Organization , the United Nations Environment Programme . At the UN ECOSOC, WFEO co-organizes with the International Science Council the Scientific and Technological Community Major Group.

In 2019, based on proposal by WFEO, the UNESCO's General Conference approved the creation of the UNESCO World Engineering Day for Sustainable Development , to be celebrated on 4 March of each year. Since then, WFEO has been coordinating the related celebrations around the world, through its membership and partnering institutions.

The governing body of WFEO is the General Assembly. Between meetings of the General Assembly the affairs of the Federation are directed by the Executive Council. The business of the Federation is dealt with by the Executive Board, supported by the Executive Director. Actions the General Assembly, Executive Council, or Executive Board are by majority vote.
WFEO's membership comprises a hundred member institutions, including national members representing a country, and international members representing either a global region or continent, or representing a branch of the engineering profession at the global scale.

WFEO's main activities in specialized fields of engineering is carried out by its committees, which are hosted by national members for a four-year term.

WFEO body meets annually for the General Assembly or Executive Council, and the Committees' meetings. These meetings are framed by a conference, where non affiliated engineers can join. In general these meetings and conferences are held in November.

WFEO's President is elected by the General Assembly for a two-years term, in the context of an immediate past president/president/president-elect system.