Hans Peter Moravec (born November 30, 1948, Kautzen , Austria ) is an adjunct faculty member at the Robotics Institute of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh , USA. He is known for his work on robotics , artificial intelligence , and writings on the impact of technology . Moravec also is a futurist with many of his publications and predictions focusing on transhumanism . Moravec developed techniques in computer vision for determining the region of interest (ROI) in a scene.

Moravec attended Loyola College in Montreal for two years and transferred to Acadia University , where he received his BSc in mathematics in 1969. He received his MSc in computer science in 1971 from the University of Western Ontario . He then earned a PhD from Stanford University in 1980 for a TV -equipped robot which was remote controlled by a large computer (the Stanford Cart ). The robot was able to negotiate cluttered obstacle courses . Another achievement in robotics was the discovery of new approaches for robot spatial representation such as 3D occupancy grids. He also developed the idea of bush robots .

Moravec joined the newly established Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon in 1980 as a research scientist, becoming research professor in 1995. He has been an adjunct professor at the institute since 2005.

Moravec was a cofounder of Seegrid Corporation of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania , in 2003 which is a robotics company with one of its goals being to develop a fully autonomous robot capable of navigating its environment without human intervention.

He is also somewhat known for his work on space tethers .

Hans Moravec has made some concrete predictions as to the future of intelligence, by estimating the computational cost (measured in instructions per second ) of various operations of human intelligence, and comparing it with the future of computer computational power as predicted by Moore's law .

In When will computer hardware match the human brain (1998) , he estimated that human brains operate at about 10 15 {\displaystyle 10^{15}} instructions per second, and that, if Moore's law continues, a computer with the same speed would cost only 1000 USD ( 1997 dollars ) in mid-2020s, thus "computers suitable for humanlike robots will appear in the 2020s".

In his 1988 book Mind Children , Moravec outlines Moore's law and predictions about the future of artificial life. Moravec outlines a timeline and a scenario in this regard, in that the robots will evolve into a new series of artificial species, starting around 2030–2040.

Moravec also outlined the "neural substitution argument" in Mind Children , published 7 years before David Chalmers published a similar argument in his paper " Absent Qualia, Fading Qualia, Dancing Qualia ", which is sometimes cited as the source of the idea. The neural substitution argument is that if each neuron in a conscious brain can be replaced successively by an electronic substitute with the same behavior as the neuron it replaces, then a biological consciousness would be transferred seamlessly into an electronic computer, thus proving that consciousness does not depend on biology and can be treated as an abstract computable process.

In Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind ( ISBN 0195136306 ), published in 1998, Moravec further considers the implications of evolving robot intelligence, generalizing Moore's law to technologies predating the integrated circuit , and extrapolating it to predict a coming "mind fire" of rapidly expanding superintelligence .

Arthur C. Clarke wrote about this book: " Robot is the most awesome work of controlled imagination I have ever encountered: Hans Moravec stretched my mind until it hit the stops." David Brin also praised the book: "Moravec blends hard scientific practicality with a prophet's far-seeing vision." On the other hand, the book was reviewed less favorably by Colin McGinn for The New York Times . McGinn wrote, "Moravec … writes bizarre, confused, incomprehensible things about consciousness as an abstraction, like number, and as a mere "interpretation" of brain activity. He also loses his grip on the distinction between virtual and real reality as his speculations spiral majestically into incoherence."