Musicians United for Safe Energy , or MUSE , is an activist group founded in 1979 by Jackson Browne , Graham Nash , Bonnie Raitt , Harvey Wasserman and John Hall .  The group advocates against the use of nuclear energy , forming shortly after the Three Mile Island nuclear accident in March 1979.  MUSE organized a series of five No Nukes concerts held at Madison Square Garden in New York in September 1979.  On September 23, 1979, almost 200,000 people attended a large rally staged by MUSE on the then-empty north end of the Battery Park City landfill in New York.

Other musicians performing at the concerts included Crosby, Stills and Nash , Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band , James Taylor , Carly Simon , Chaka Khan , the Doobie Brothers , Jesse Colin Young , Gil Scott-Heron , Tom Petty , Dan Fogelberg , Poco and others.  The album No Nukes , and a film, also titled No Nukes , were both released in 1980 to document the performances. A full No Nukes concert featuring Browne and Crosby, Stills & Nash was also filmed near the beach in Ventura, California , at the Ventura County Fairgrounds , but none of that footage made it into the final cut.

In the 2006 midterm elections , Hall was elected to the United States House of Representatives from New York's 19th congressional district , on a platform that included intensive investment in alternative energy . He defeated the incumbent, Sue Kelly .

In 2007, Raitt, Nash, and Browne, as part of the No Nukes group, recorded a music video of the Buffalo Springfield song " For What It's Worth ".

Thirty two years after the No Nukes concert in New York, on August 7, 2011, a MUSE benefit concert was held at Shoreline Amphitheater in Mountain View, CA . to raise money for MUSE and for Japanese tsunami / nuclear disaster relief. Artists included Jackson Browne, Bonnie Raitt, John Hall, Graham Nash, David Crosby , Stephen Stills , Kitaro , Jason Mraz , Sweet Honey in the Rock , the Doobie Brothers, Tom Morello , and Jonathan Wilson . The show was powered off-grid .