In publishing , a note is a brief text in which the author comments on the subject and themes of the book and names supporting citations . In the editorial production of books and documents, typographically, a note is usually several lines of text at the bottom of the page , at the end of a chapter, at the end of a volume, or a house-style typographic usage throughout the text. Notes are usually identified with superscript numbers or a symbol.

Footnotes are informational notes located at the foot of the thematically relevant page, whilst endnotes are informational notes published at the end of a chapter, the end of a volume, or the conclusion of a multi-volume book. Unlike footnotes, which require manipulating the page design (text-block and page layouts) to accommodate the additional text, endnotes are advantageous to editorial production because the textual inclusion does not alter the design of the publication. However, graphic designers of contemporary editions of the Bible often place the notes in a narrow column in the page centre, between two columns of biblical text.

In the typesetting of texts in the English language, the footnotes and the endnotes usually are indicated with a superscript number at the end of the pertinent block of text. Typographic characters, such as the asterisk (*) and the dagger mark (†) also are used in place of sequential numbers to identify notes; the traditional order of usage of the typographic characters is: (i) the Asterisk [*], (ii) the Dagger mark † , (iii) the Crossed dagger mark ‡ , (iv) the Section sign § , (v) the Vertical bar ‖ , and (vi) the Pilcrow ¶ . Additional typographic characters used to identify notes include the Number sign # , the Greek letter delta Δ , the diamond-shaped lozenge ◊ , the downward arrow ↓ , and the manicule ☞ , the little hand with an extended index finger.

Footnote reference numbers ("cues") in the body text of a page should be placed at the end of a sentence if possible, after the final punctuation. This minimizes the interruption of the flow of reading and allows the reader to absorb a complete sentence-idea before having their attention redirected to the content of the note.

The cue is placed after any punctuation (normally after the closing point of a sentence). ... Notes cued in the middle of a sentence are a distraction to the reader, and cues are best located at the end of sentences.

Notes are most often used as an alternative to long explanations, citations, comments, or annotations that can be distracting to readers. Most literary style guidelines (including the Modern Language Association and the American Psychological Association ) recommend limited use of foot- and endnotes. However, publishers often encourage note references instead of parenthetical references. Aside from use as a bibliographic element, notes are used for additional information, qualification, or explanation that might be too digressive for the main text. Footnotes are heavily utilized in academic institutions to support claims made in academic essays covering myriad topics.

In particular, footnotes are the normal form of citation in historical journals. This is due, firstly, to the fact that the most important references are often to archive sources or interviews that do not readily fit standard formats, and secondly, to the fact that historians expect to see the exact nature of the evidence that is being used at each stage.

The MLA (Modern Language Association) requires the superscript numbers in the main text to be placed following the punctuation in the phrase or clause the note is about. The exception to this rule occurs when a sentence contains a dash, in which case the superscript would precede it. However, MLA is not known for endnote or footnote citations, and APA and Chicago styles use them more regularly. Historians are known to use Chicago style citations.

Aside from their technical use, authors use notes for a variety of reasons:

The US Government Printing Office Style Manual devotes over 660 words to the topic of footnotes. NASA has guidance for footnote usage in its historical documents.

Former Associate Justice Stephen Breyer of the Supreme Court of the United States is famous in the American legal community for his writing style, in which he never uses notes. He prefers to keep all citations within the text (which is permitted in American legal citation). Richard A. Posner has also written against the use of notes in judicial opinions. Bryan A. Garner , however, advocates using notes instead of inline citations.

HTML , the predominant markup language for web pages, has no mechanism for adding notes. Despite a number of different proposals over the years, the working group has been unable to reach a consensus on it. Because of this, MediaWiki , for example, has had to introduce its own <ref></ref> tag for citing references in notes.

It might be argued that the hyperlink partially eliminates the need for notes, being the web's way to refer to another document. However, it does not allow citing to offline sources and if the destination of the link changes, the link can become dead or irrelevant. A proposed solution is the use of a digital object identifier . As of 2024, the HTML Living Standard has provided several workarounds for the inclusion of footnotes depending on length or type of annotation.

In instances where a user needs to add an endnote or footnote using HTML, they can add the superscript number using <sup></sup> , then link the superscripted text to the reference section using an anchor tag . Create an anchor tag by using <a name="ref1"></a> and then link the superscripted text to "ref1".

The London printer Richard Jugge is generally credited as the inventor of the footnote, first used in the Bishops' Bible of 1568.

Early printings of the Douay Bible used a four-dot punctuation mark (represented in Unicode as U+2E2C “⸬”) to indicate a marginal note. It can often be mistaken for two closely-spaced colons .

At times, notes have been used for their comical effect, or as a literary device.