The Nuclear Technology Portal

The MAUD Committee was founded in response to the Frisch–Peierls memorandum , which was written in March 1940 by Rudolf Peierls and Otto Frisch , two physicists who were refugees from Nazi Germany working at the University of Birmingham under the direction of Mark Oliphant . The memorandum argued that a small sphere of pure uranium-235 could have the explosive power of thousands of tons of TNT .

The chairman of the MAUD Committee was George Thomson . Research was split among four different universities: the University of Birmingham , University of Liverpool , University of Cambridge and the University of Oxford , each having a separate programme director. Various means of uranium enrichment were examined, as was nuclear reactor design, the properties of uranium-235, the use of the then-hypothetical element plutonium , and theoretical aspects of nuclear weapon design.

After fifteen months of work, the research culminated in two reports, "Use of Uranium for a Bomb" and "Use of Uranium as a Source of Power", known collectively as the MAUD Report. The report discussed the feasibility and necessity of an atomic bomb for the war effort. In response, the British created a nuclear weapons project, code named Tube Alloys . The MAUD Report was made available to the United States, where it energised the American effort, which eventually became the Manhattan Project . The report was also revealed to the Soviet Union by its atomic spies , and helped start the Soviet atomic bomb project . ( Full article... )

At age 23, she was the youngest and only female member of the team which built and experimented with the world's first nuclear reactor (then called a pile ), Chicago Pile-1 , in a project led by her mentor Enrico Fermi . In particular, Woods was instrumental in the construction and then utilization of geiger counters for analysis during experimentation . She was the only woman present when the reactor went critical . She worked with Fermi on the Manhattan Project , and she subsequently helped evaluate the cross section of xenon, which had poisoned the first Hanford production reactor when it began operation.

After the war, she became a fellow at Fermi's Institute for Nuclear Studies at the University of Chicago. She later worked at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey , the Brookhaven National Laboratory , and New York University , where she became a professor in 1962. Her research involved high-energy physics , astrophysics and cosmology . In 1966 she divorced John Marshall and married Nobel laureate Willard Libby . She moved as a professor to the University of Colorado , and was a staff member at RAND Corporation . In later life she became interested in ecological and environmental issues, and she devised a method of using the isotope ratios in tree rings to study climate change . She was a strong advocate of food irradiation as a means of killing harmful bacteria . ( Full article... )

The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: