Architecture – the process and the product of designing and constructing buildings. Architectural works with a certain indefinable combination of design quality and external circumstances may become cultural symbols and / or be considered works of art.

Architecture can be described as all of the following:

Architecture is variously defined in conflicting ways, highlighting the difficulty of describing the scope of the subject precisely:

Some key quotations on the subject of architecture:

Professionals involved in planning, designing, and constructing buildings include:

Architectural style – a specific way of building, characterized by the features that make it notable. A style may include such elements as form, method of construction, materials, and regional character. Influential contemporary and relatively recent styles include :

Terms used to describe different architectural concerns, origins and objectives.

Architecture of Africa

Architecture of Asia

Architecture of Europe

Architecture of Oceania

Architecture of South America

Although not all buildings are architecture, the term encompasses a huge range of building types, as summarised in the following list pages:

Professional requirements for architects – Students undertake specific vocational training in order to qualify as a professional architects. Training typically consists of one or more university degrees and a period of practical experience. In some countries, it is illegal to use the title architect without accredited qualifications. In the United Kingdom the Architects Registration Board exists solely to regulate membership of the profession. In the United States the National Architectural Accrediting Board regulates professional educational programs and the National Council of Architectural Registration Boards is an umbrella organization to recommend model laws, regulations, exams, and to facilitate reciprocity in licensure between different jurisdictions. Architectural education can involve degree types that do not directly result in licensing, such as Bachelor of Science in architecture, Bachelor of Arts in architecture, or a research PhD in architecture. Some of the qualifications specific to architectural licensing include:

Architecture prize – Architecture prizes are generally awarded for completed projects and are chosen from publicised or nominated works, not from submissions by the originating architect. The RIBA Royal Gold Medal has in fact been refused on a number of occasions.

more...