Paul N. Worsey is an emeritus professor and well-known mining and explosives expert and researcher at the Missouri University of Science and Technology (formerly the University of Missouri-Rolla). Outside of teaching, research, and writing in his field, he is noted for creating and hosting the University's annual "Explosives Camp" for 16- and 17-year-old aspiring mining engineers. Since 2008, Worsey has been one of the host experts on the Discovery Channel documentary series, The Detonators .

Worsey obtained a Bachelor of Science degree from the University of Bristol in 1977. The following year he completed his Masters of Science degree in Rock Mechanics Excavation Engineering. In 1981 he obtained his Ph.D. in the field of Mining (Explosives) Engineering from Newcastle University . His dissertation was entitled: Geotechnical factors affecting the application of pre-split blasting to rock slopes . In the past 10 years his research has focused on the demilitarization of explosive ordnance.

He is the holder of several patents, including US Patent No. 4,754,705 for a blast control plug. "The device is designed to help keep explosive energy in blastholes when they detonate and thus more efficiently break rock and reduce environmental problems such as flyrock, airblast and ground vibrations."

He is also a certified British Parachute Association Instructor, having trained more than 1,000 students at the Sunderland Parachute Center.

The camp was first held in 2004 and hosted 20 students for the one-week course. By 2008 the camp was hosting 60 campers in three one-week residential camp sessions. It is currently restricted to students who can prove American citizenship, are at least 16 years of age or older, and considered "up and coming students" in their high school classes. The camp has been widely reported upon in such media outlets as the New York Times , National Public Radio (NPR) , and the International Herald Tribune .

Camp curriculum includes:

In addition to blowing up chickens, the campers feel concussions from underground explosions, help generate a 150-foot water spout, experience demolition demonstrations and fashion fireworks displays. ...  Many of the activities take place at Missouri S&T’s Experimental Mine. Each day, the campers participate in classroom instruction and safety training before initiating an explosion.

Worsey teaches a number of courses at the Missouri University of Science and Technology, including the following which he personally developed:

The Missouri University of Science and Technology is the only institution in the United States to offer a specific "explosives minor" and a "non-thesis masters" as part of its Explosives Engineering Program.

Worsey is the author or co-author of numerous articles, primarily in peer reviewed journals in the field of engineering: