Peppermint OS is a Linux distribution based on Debian and Devuan Stable, and formerly based on Ubuntu. It uses the Xfce desktop environment . It aims to provide a familiar environment for newcomers to Linux, which requires relatively low hardware resources to run.

Peppermint OS ships with few native applications and a traditional desktop interface . What originally made it unique was its approach to creating a hybrid desktop that integrated both cloud and local applications . In place of traditionally native applications for common tasks (word processing, image editing), it ships with the custom Ice application, which allows users to create site-specific browsers (SSBs).

In Peppermint OS, the open-source Firefox browser is used to enable a site-specific browser (SSB) for cloud applications. Instead of opening a browser and then visiting an application site, a dedicated browser window is integrated into the system for a specific application. Support for Firefox (alongside Chromium and Chrome web browsers) was added to the custom Ice application in 2015, allowing the creation of SSBs in a web browser window.
Peppermint OS is a project where you can marry the cloud to the desktop. As with any Ubuntu based operating system, applications can be installed natively from Ubuntu compatible repositories , allowing one to run cloud-based applications alongside desktop software. Like any other Linux distribution, it allows installing packages like LibreOffice , GIMP , VLC , Skype , etc. Peppermint is built from Ubuntu and supports whatever Ubuntu supports. Peppermint OS ships with mintInstall , Synaptic , and GDebi to facilitate this.

Peppermint's namesake is Linux Mint . The developers originally wanted to make use of configuration and utilities sourced from Linux Mint coupled with an environment that was less demanding on resources and more focused on web integration . They felt that the concept was a "spicier" version of Mint, so the name Peppermint was a natural fit.

While Linux Mint is known for its Cinnamon desktop , Peppermint uses a default desktop that is a hybrid based mainly on selected components from it and XFCE that is significantly more lightweight.

Peppermint has consistently released updates on a decent cadence since at least 2010, when it was first released.

Peppermint OS was initially conceived at the Black Rose Pub in Hendersonville, North Carolina , USA, during a night of drinking and discussion about the future of desktop Linux. It was originally designed to be a social media -centric distribution.

Pre-alpha development builds consisted of a wide array of potential directions before the decision to fork Lubuntu was made. There was quite a bit of experimentation with KDE , E17 , Adobe Air , and several different code bases during January and February 2010. Alpha builds using the Lubuntu 10.04 code base started in March 2010. Peppermint was released to a small group of private beta testers in April 2010 until its first public release .

On January 14, 2020, Peppermint CEO Mark Greaves (PCNetSpec) died in hospital. After taking over Peppermint from Shane Remington and Kendall Weaver shortly after Peppermint 5, Mark devoted his life to Peppermint with his family's support and went on to release more versions of Peppermint up to Peppermint 10 and a respin of Peppermint 10. The official announcement was made on the Peppermint forum and a memorial fund has been set up by his family to honour Mark's legacy.

On February 2, 2022, PeppermintOS released a new version for the first time in two years. Its main new features and changes include:

On July 1, 2023 PeppermintOS released a new version based on Debian (Bookworm) and Devuan (Daedalus)

On Jul1 1 2024 Peppermint released updated ISOs for their Flashship and Loaded builds.

Peppermint OS uses a hybrid release schedule. Updates are rolled out as needed in a rolling release fashion, but it is not a "true rolling release".

Essentially, Peppermint is a system that has rolling application updates and some system updates. Periodically, a Respin is released which incorporates minor bug fixes and recent updates.

Peppermint 10 is based on the 18.04 LTS (long-term support) version of Ubuntu .