A pilot report or PIREP is a report of actual flight or ground conditions encountered by an aircraft . Reports commonly include information about atmospheric conditions (like temperature , icing , turbulence ) or airport conditions (like runway condition codes or ground equipment failures). This information is usually relayed by radio to the nearest ground station, but other options (e.g. electronic submission) also exist in some regions. The message would then be encoded and relayed to other weather offices and air traffic service units.

Although the actual form used to record the PIREP may differ from one country to another, the standards and criteria will remain almost the same. At a minimum the PIREP must contain a header, aircraft location, time, flight level, aircraft type and one other field.

In recent years , a PIREP will also include UA or UUA used to identify the PIREP as routine or urgent.

Like PIREPs, Aircraft Reports (AIREP) are reports of actual weather conditions of an aircraft in flight. AIREPs are often automated reports, contrary to PIREPs. Likewise, a different encoding is used for either type.

The message identifier "UA" is used when the PIREP contains non-hazardous weather information. If the PIREP contains a report of a tornado , funnel cloud , waterspout , severe turbulence , severe icing , hail , or a low-level wind shear hazard, the identifier "UUA" would be used.

The location (/OV) can be reported in one of three ways: as a direction and distance from a navigation aid (NAVAID), as a direction and distance from an airport, or as the latitude and longitude of the aircraft.

The time (/TM) used is the UTC time that the PIREP is reported.

The flight level (/FL) is reported as either a three digit value that indicates the altitude of the aircraft above sea level in hundreds of feet or can be one of three abbreviations: DURD (during descent or on approach), DURC (during climb or after takeoff) and UNKN (unknown).

Aircraft type (/TP) will be the approved ICAO designator, or UNKN if not reported.

Sky cover (/SK) is used to report the cloud layer amounts and the height of the cloud base. The tops of the cloud layers can also be included, as can more than one layer of cloud. Heights are in hundreds of feet above sea level and are three digits. Abbreviations used in this group are "CLR" (clear), "FEW" (few), "SCT" (scattered), "BKN" (broken) and "OVC" (overcast).

Temperature (/TA) is the air temperature in whole degrees Celsius as a two-digit value, with negative temperatures preceded by a minus (-) sign. In the United States, negative temperatures are preceded by the letter M (M).

Wind velocity (/WV) must contain both the wind speed and direction. Direction is reported as a three-digit value in whole degrees true and the wind speed in knots also in three digits.

Turbulence (/TB) and the intensity are reported in a PIREP based on the aircraft and occupants reaction to the turbulence. The altitude of the turbulence should be included using three-digit groups. When the top or the base of the turbulence is unknown then the abbreviation BLO (below) or ABV (above) should be used. Turbulence should be reported as LGT (light), MDT (moderate), SVR (severe) or in exceptional cases EXTRM (extreme). Clear-air turbulence is reported as CAT.

Icing (/IC) is reported by type and the intensity or rate of accretion. The type of ice is reported as "CLR" (clear), " RIME ", or "MXD" (mixed). The intensity is reported as "TR" (trace), "LGT" (light), "MDT" (moderate), and "SVR" (severe). (Units are measured in MSL - MEAN SEA LEVEL)

Remarks (/RM) report on other weather conditions that are not covered in the rest of the PIREP may include such things as icing in precipitation, thunderstorms , St. Elmo's fire and frontal conditions. There are many other types of weather conditions that could be reported in a PIREP.

The above explanation of PIREP fields is Canadian. The United States version may also include a weather (/WX) group, while other countries may use other groups and measurements.

These examples are taken from the Canadian MANOBS (Manual of Surface Weather Observations) published by Environment Canada .

In the US, air traffic controllers are required to solicit PIREPs upon request of other facilities or pilots, or when any of the following conditions exists or is forecast in their area.

At least once hourly, terminal controllers must obtain a descent/climb-out PIREP, including cloud information and other related phenomena.