Political communication is the study of political messaging that is communicated to the public i.e. political campaigns , and advertising , usually within the mass media . It is an interdisciplinary field that draws from communication and political science . Political communication is concerned with ideas such as information flow , political influence , policy making , news , and their effects on citizens . The field also focuses on the study of the media , political speeches , propaganda , corporations and non-profit organisations that communicate to affect political processes . Modern societal changes that have affected the field include the digitization of media, and a movement towards a post-truth media environment.

Political communication has existed since antiquity . During this era it was common for rulers to use symbols and monuments to communicate power and authority to the masses. In ancient Greece, public speeches such as those delivered by Pericles in Athens, played a crucial role in shaping political discourse and rallying public support for war efforts.

During the era of the Roman Empire, political communication took on a more sophisticated form with the use of propaganda , rhetoric , and public spectacles in order to try and influence public opinion. Figures famed for their political communication skills include Cicero .

After the creation of the print media with the dawn of the modern printing press in modern industrial Britain , this lead to the ability to create modern mass media in the 20th century, which transformed political communication, giving rise to new forms of propaganda, advertising, and public relations. Political leaders such as Winston Churchill and Franklin. D. Roosevelt utilized radio broadcasts to reach millions of listeners during times of crisis and war. Edward Herman notes that the expensive nature of the printing press meant that early on in the technology's existence, labour and co-operative organisations were easily priced out of press media markets due to funding issues, meaning that corporations obtained an early grip on the market. Herman therefore states that this meant that early on in the mass media of Britain, corporate right-wing voices that would self-select editors to run their publications, essentially stopped organised working class and left-wing voices from participating in the mass media via lack of capital .

During the 1990s and the early 2000s (after successful campaigns by corporate advertising companies) political spin started to come into mainstream usage. Governments like Tony Blair's in The United Kingdom and George W. Bush were known for instituting spin within their communications. Alistair Campbell , a journalist turned Downing Street Press Secretary (who was referred to as a ' spin doctor ' in the media) had the job of deflecting or ' spinning ' bad situations that showed the government in a bad light, via press briefings with the British media. Campbell became an influential and controversial addition to the political communication toolkit of Tony Blair's Labour government in the United Kingdom . This practice has now become standard in subsequent governments in Western countries like the United Kingdom and the United States , with dedicated 'briefing rooms' whereby members of government address and communicate with the countries' press, which have also come to be known as spin rooms .

Now, during the digital age , political communication has come to include the use of online platforms like social media , free online video services like YouTube where news channels can post freely, and online News Websites , which has changed how the public and voters receive their political news and information. Barack Obama 's presidential campaigns in 2008 and 2012 are notable for mobilizing supporters, as they helped innovate the use of social media to engage voters and raise funds. Volodymyr Zelenskyy 's successful 2019 Presidential Campaign also featured heavy usage of social media posts.

Today, Political communication continues to evolve quickly, as new technologies such as AI and big data analytics have begun to reshape how campaigns can target and persuade voters. However, this has led to large concerns regarding misinformation , echo chambers , and online polarization. Recent election manipulation scandals like the Facebook-Cambridge Analytica scandal which was found to have assisted Donald Trump 's election campaign unethically by mining user's facebook data, leading to a further distrust of corporate and political institutions.

An outline of key areas of political communication study are:

James Chesebro , further suggests five critical approaches to the modern study of Political Communication:

Robert E. Denton and Gary C. Woodward , via their work in Political Communication in America, define Political communication as the ways and intentions of message senders to influence the political environment. This includes public discussion (e.g. political speeches , news media coverage , and ordinary citizens' talk ) that considers who has authority to sanction the allocation of public resources, who has authority to make decisions, as well as social meaning like what makes someone American.

"...the crucial factor that makes communication 'political' is not the source of a message, but its content and purpose."

David L. Swanson and Dan Nimmo define political communication as "the strategic use of communication to influence public knowledge, beliefs, and action on political matters." They emphasize the strategic nature of political communication, highlighting the role of persuasion in political discourse . Brian McNair provides a similar definition when he writes that political communication is "purposeful communication about politics." For McNair, this means that this not only covers verbal or written statements, but also visual representations such as dress attire, make-up, hairstyle or logo design. In other words, it also includes all those aspects that develop a "political identity" or "image". According to Harald Borgebund, the author of Political Communication and the Realities of Democracy , "Political communication is essential in a democratic polity."

Reflecting on the relationship between political communication and contemporary agenda-building, Vian Bakir defines Strategic Political Communication (SPC) as comprising 'political communication that is manipulative in intent, utilizes social scientific techniques and heuristic devices to understand human motivation , human behavior and the media environment in order to inform effectively what should be communicated – encompassing its detail and overall direction – and what should be withheld, with the aim of taking into account and influencing public opinion , and creating strategic alliances and an enabling environment for government policies – both at home and abroad'.

To further expand on why political communication can be viewed as manipulative, Michael Gurevitch and Jay G. Blumber , contributors of Political Communication Systems and Democratic Values stated that "the very structure of political communication involves a division between movers and shakers at the top and bystanders below." However, one way that contemporary media has tried to combat the imbalances of political communication is through the creation of public access television. According to a study done, Access Television and Grassroots Political Communication in the United States, by Dr. Laura Stein  "public access has opened up a space for grassroots political communication on television" this is because public access  communication has allowed for an open space in a variety of fields of communication no matter the speakers ideological view points.

The Bush Administration 's torture-for-intelligence policy, initiated soon after 9/11 , was kept secret for several years, as remains the level of complicity of many other nation-states' governments. While this secret policy was gradually revealed from 2004 onwards, initiated by the Abu Ghraib torture photos, the Bush administration engaged in SPC to publicly reframe and protect its secret policy. SPC included silencing and persuasive discursive activity.

According to Jake Sherman and Albert Trithart, “United Nations peace operations often struggle to communicate their messages to the local population and the broader global community.” It argued, therefore, that “the outdated public information approach of the United Nations must be transformed into more dynamic communications efforts.”, "This required missions to better understand key audiences, make better use of national staff, embrace technology, train leaders in effective communication, proactively engage with local populations, and tailor both the message and means of communication to particular audiences."

The Middle East

In the Middle East, “even those supported by a U.S. administration, are at best visionary and without any real practical use”. As explained by Hussein Amin from the American University of Cairo, “-because many people view censorship as a sign of social responsibility, civil society has a deep distrust of itself. While admitting that political communication in the mass media has diversified and developed some more liberal patterns in recent years”. In general, “Mass media have long been linked to the historical development and emergence of national identities and the modern nation-state by creating bounded spaces of political communication and discourse".

In cases of on-going war like Syria and Palestine, the majority of media formats are censored towards the Middle East in order to avoid further catastrophization of an event, possibly by the West. For example, in Syria, 'The Rebel Free Syrian Army' was created as an opposition to Bashar al-Assad's dictatorship.

Political communication has long used political persuasion . Political figures understand the role of the media in gaining the acceptance of voters. For example, political communication delivered through social media tends to be accompanied by social interaction and public opinion. Logos , ethos , and pathos are key methods of communication theories known to be used in political public speaking to persuade.

A core theoretical model in political communication during the modern era is the propaganda model . In 1988 Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky theorized that the interests of globalized elites were warping the journalistic integrity of the mass media and its attempts to communicate news, using the United States Corporate media (and it's basis in the British Corporate-Capitalist model) to critique modern Western communications, looking at the communications in relation to Capitalism and Neo-Imperialism . They suggest that the political consent of the electorate would also be damaged by this type of political communication in the mass media:

"The more elusive or imaginary the foe, the better for manufacturing consent . The picture of the world that's presented to the public has only the remotest relation to reality."

In terms of political communication, the propaganda model is generally used in the context of the globalized American corporate media and how it organically acts in the interests of corporate elites , specifically in an anti-democratic way. Therefore Herman and Chomsky argue that the interests of the corporate elite (trying to profit maximize) are not often interested in the democratic rights of citizens and therefore create a new form of propaganda (via the mass media of privately owned news corporations), which has damaging effects on different democratic governments i.e. The United States Government .

Social media has become an increasingly important tool for political communication. For certain demographics it is one of the main platforms from which individuals acquire their news, and allows them to interact with it via commenting and sharing. Social media has dramatically changed the way in which modern political campaigns are run. With more digital native citizens coming into the voting population, social media has become an important medium where politicians can establish themselves and engage with voters. In an increasingly digitized world, new research has shown that social media is becoming increasingly important in electoral politics.

Social media experience relies heavily on the user themselves due to the platforms' algorithms which tailor consumer experience for each user. This results in each person seeing more like-minded news due to the increase in digital social behavior. Additionally, social media has changed politics because it has given politicians a direct medium to give their constituents information and the people to speak directly to the politicians. This informal nature can lead to informational mistakes because it is not being subjected to the same " fact-checking processes as institutional journalism."

Social media creates greater opportunity for political persuasion due to the high number of citizens that regularly engage and build followings on social media. The more that a person engages on social media, the more influential they believe themselves to be, resulting in more people considering themselves to be politically persuasive.

In Australia 86% of Australians access the Internet, and with a 17,048,864 voting age population, around 14,662,023 voting population has access to Internet, and 65% of them use social media, with 9,530,314 Australian voters using social media. The 2013 Yellow™ Social Media Report also found that among internet users, 65% of Australians use social media, up from 62% in 2014.

With almost half of the Australian voting population active on social media, political parties are adapting quickly to influence and connect with their voters. Studies have found that journalists in Australia widely use social media in a professional context and that it has become a viable method of communication between the mainstream media and wider audiences.