Quantum robotics is an interdisciplinary field that investigates the intersection of robotics and quantum mechanics . This field, in particular, explores the applications of quantum phenomena such as quantum entanglement within the realm of robotics. Examples of its applications include quantum communication in multi-agent cooperative robotic scenarios, the use of quantum algorithms in performing robotics tasks, and the integration of quantum devices (e.g., quantum detectors) in robotic systems.

The free-space quantum communication between mobile platforms was proposed for reconfigurable Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) applications using drones in 2017. This technology was later advanced in various aspects in mobile drone and vehicle platforms in several configurations such as drone-to-drone, drone-to-moving vehicle, and vehicle-to-vehicle systems .Communication system technology for demonstration of BB84 quantum key distribution in optical aircraft downlinks. Airborne demonstration of a quantum key distribution receiver payload. Communication system technology for demonstration of BB84 quantum key distribution in optical aircraft downlinks.

Other researchers contributed to low size, weight and power quantum key distribution system for small form unmanned aerial vehicles ., characterization of a polarization-based receiver for mobile free space optical QKD ., and optical-relayed entanglement distribution using drones as mobile nodes. The topic of free-space quantum communication between mobile platforms, which was initially implemented to fulfill the need for free-space QKD and entanglement distribution using mobile nodes, was brought into robotics domain as an emerging interdisciplinary mechatronics topic to investigate and explore the interface between the quantum technologies and robotic systems domain. The main advantage of such integrated technology being the guaranteed security in communication between multiagent and cooperative autonomous systems. Although as a newfound emerging area, other benefits are anticipated in the future research by accessing the fast-growing and forthcoming quantum advantages. However, such progress can only be made after a foundation is laid out in what is referred to as “quantum robotics” and “quantum mechatronics”. The paper contributes to providing the complementary background needed for the research in integrating free-space quantum communication into the robotics field. Other contributions include modernizing the mechatronics discipline with quantum engineering for educational purposes which was initially proposed in. This paper further introduces quantum engineering topics needed in training and preparing the future engineering workforce to succeed in the rapid-paced ever-changing industry. In particular, the topics on the quantum mechanics fundamentals such as quantum entanglement, cryptography, teleportation, as well and the Bell test, are proposed which are suitable for engineering curriculum and University projects.

In the realm of quantum mechanics , the names Alice and Bob are frequently employed to illustrate various phenomena, protocols, and applications. These include their roles in quantum cryptography , quantum key distribution , quantum entanglement , and quantum teleportation . The terms "Alice Robot" and "Bob Robot" serve as analogous expressions that merge the concepts of Alice and Bob from quantum mechanics with mechatronic mobile platforms (such as robots, drones, and autonomous vehicles). For example, the Alice Robot functions as a transmitter platform that communicates with the Bob Robot, housing the receiving detectors.

The schematic representation of the experimental setup for achieving quantum entanglement through the spontaneous parametric down-conversion process is shown in the figure.

The experimental setup that includes the laser source, and Alice and Bob is shown in the figure below.

The Alice and Bob and the corresponding components.

The schematic representation of the Alice and Bob robots when sharing entangled photons in a quantum communication or quantum key distribution experimental setup between moving robotic platforms is shown in the figure.

The nomenclature used in the figure:

AL: Alignment Laser

DMSP: Shortpass dichroic mirror

FSM: Fast steering mirror

FFC: Fixed focus collimator

HWP: Half-wave plate

M: Mirror

MTC: Motion tracking camera

MTC & M: Motion tracking camera and mirror

NBF: Narrowband filter

NPBS: Non-Polarizing beamsplitter cube (50:50)

PABBO: Paired Barium borate (BBO) Crystal (Type I SPDC crystals)

PBS: Polarizing beamsplitter cube

PSD: Position sensing detector

QP: Quartz plate

QRC: QR code

SL: Source Laser

SPCM: Single photon counter module