Ralph C. Merkle (born February 2, 1952) is an American computer scientist and mathematician. He is one of the inventors of public-key cryptography , the inventor of cryptographic hashing , and more recently a researcher and speaker on cryonics .

Merkle is a renowned cryptographer, known for devising Merkle's Puzzles , co-inventing the Merkle–Hellman knapsack cryptosystem, and inventing cryptographic hashing ( Merkle–Damgård construction ) and Merkle trees . He has worked as a manager at Elxsi , research scientist at Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Center), and a nanotechnology theorist at Zyvex . Merkle has held positions as a Distinguished Professor at Georgia Tech , senior research fellow at IMM, faculty member at Singularity University , and board member at Alcor Life Extension Foundation . He received the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal in 2010 and has published works on molecular manipulation and self-replicating machines . Ralph Merkle is a grandnephew of baseball star Fred Merkle and is married to video game designer Carol Shaw . He serves on the board of directors of the cryonics organization Alcor Life Extension Foundation and appears in the science fiction novel The Diamond Age .

While an undergraduate, Merkle devised Merkle's Puzzles , a scheme for communication over an insecure channel , as part of a class project at UC Berkeley. The scheme is now recognized to be an early example of public key cryptography . He co-invented the Merkle–Hellman knapsack cryptosystem , invented cryptographic hashing (now called the Merkle–Damgård construction based on a pair of articles published 10 years later that established the security of the scheme), and invented Merkle trees . The Merkle–Damgård construction is at the heart of many hashing algorithms. While at Xerox PARC , Merkle designed the Khufu and Khafre block ciphers , and the Snefru hash function.

Merkle was the manager of compiler development at Elxsi from 1980. In 1988, he became a research scientist at Xerox PARC . In 1999 he became a nanotechnology theorist for Zyvex . In 2003 he became a Distinguished Professor at Georgia Tech , where he led the Georgia Tech Information Security Center . In 2006 he returned to the San Francisco Bay Area, where he has been a senior research fellow at IMM, a faculty member at Singularity University , and a board member of the Alcor Life Extension Foundation . He was awarded the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal in 2010. He is active in the field of molecular manipulation and self-replicating machines and has published books on the subject.

Ralph Merkle is a grandnephew of baseball star Fred Merkle ; son of Theodore Charles Merkle, director of Project Pluto ; and brother of Judith Merkle Riley , a historical writer. Merkle is married to Carol Shaw , the video game designer best known for the 1982 Atari 2600 game River Raid .

Merkle is on the board of directors of the cryonics organization Alcor Life Extension Foundation .

Merkle appears in the science fiction novel The Diamond Age , involving nanotechnology.