This is an accepted version of this page

Sergey Mikhailovich Brin ( ‹See Tfd› Russian: Сергей Михайлович Брин ; born August 21, 1973) is an American businessman and computer scientist who co-founded Google with Larry Page . He was the president of Google's parent company, Alphabet Inc. , until stepping down from the role on December 3, 2019. He and Page remain at Alphabet as co-founders, controlling shareholders , and board members. As of June 2024, Brin is the 7th-richest person in the world , with an estimated net worth of $146 billion, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index and Forbes .

Brin immigrated to the United States from the Soviet Union at the age of six. He earned his bachelor's degree at the University of Maryland, College Park , following in his father's and grandfather's footsteps by studying mathematics as well as computer science. After graduation, in September 1993, he enrolled in Stanford University to acquire a PhD in computer science. There he met Page, with whom he built a web search engine . The program became popular at Stanford, and they discontinued their PhD studies to start up Google in Susan Wojcicki 's garage in Menlo Park .

Sergey Mikhailovich Brin was born on August 21, 1973, in Moscow in the Soviet Union , to Russian Jewish parents, Mikhail and Eugenia Brin, both graduates of Moscow State University (MSU). His father is a retired mathematics professor at the University of Maryland , and his mother is a researcher at NASA 's Goddard Space Flight Center .

The Brin family lived in a three-room apartment in central Moscow, which they also shared with Sergey's paternal grandmother. In 1977, after his father returned from a mathematics conference in Warsaw, Poland, Mikhail Brin announced that it was time for the family to emigrate. They formally applied for their exit visa in September 1978, and as a result, his father was "promptly fired". For related reasons, his mother had to leave her job. For the next eight months, without any steady income, they were forced to take on temporary jobs as they waited, afraid their request would be denied as it was for many refuseniks . In May 1979, they were granted their official exit visas and were allowed to leave the country.

The Brin family lived in Vienna and Paris while Mikhail Brin secured a teaching position at the University of Maryland with help from Anatole Katok . During this time, the Brin family received support and assistance from the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society . They arrived in the United States on October 25, 1979.

Brin attended elementary school at Paint Branch Montessori School in Adelphi, Maryland , but he received further education at home; his father, a professor in the department of mathematics at the University of Maryland, encouraged him to learn mathematics and his family helped him retain his Russian-language skills. He attended Eleanor Roosevelt High School, Maryland . In September 1990, Brin enrolled in the University of Maryland, where he received his Bachelor of Science from the Department of Computer Science in 1993 with honors in computer science and mathematics at the age of 19. In 1993, he interned at Wolfram Research , the developers of Mathematica .

Brin began his graduate study in computer science at Stanford University on a graduate fellowship from the National Science Foundation , receiving an M.S. in computer science in 1995. As of 2008 , he was on leave from his PhD studies at Stanford.

During an orientation for new students at Stanford, he met Larry Page . The two men seemed to disagree on most subjects, but after spending time together they "became intellectual soul-mates and close friends." Brin's focus was on developing data mining systems while Page's was on extending "the concept of inferring the importance of a research paper from its citations in other papers". Together, they authored a paper titled "The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine".

To convert the backlink data gathered by BackRub's web crawler into a measure of importance for a given web page, Brin and Page developed the PageRank algorithm , and realized that it could be used to build a search engine far superior to those existing at the time. The new algorithm relied on a new kind of technology that analyzed the relevance of the backlinks that connected one Web page to another, and allowed the number of links and their rank, to determine the rank of the page. Combining their ideas, they began utilizing Page's dormitory room as a machine laboratory, and extracted spare parts from inexpensive computers to create a device that they used to connect the nascent search engine with Stanford's broadband campus network.

After filling Page's room with equipment, they then converted Brin's dorm room into an office and programming center, where they tested their new search engine designs on the web. The rapid growth of their project caused Stanford's computing infrastructure to experience problems.

Page and Brin used the former's basic HTML programming skills to set up a simple search page for users, as they did not have a web page developer to create anything visually elaborate. They also began using any computer part they could find to assemble the necessary computing power to handle searches by multiple users. As their search engine grew in popularity among Stanford users, it required additional servers to process the queries. In August 1996, the initial version of Google was made available on the Stanford Web site.

By early 1997, the BackRub page described the state as follows:

BackRub already exhibited the rudimentary functions and characteristics of a search engine: a query input was entered and it provided a list of backlinks ranked by importance. Page recalled: "We realized that we had a querying tool. It gave you a good overall ranking of pages and ordering of follow-up pages." Page said that in mid-1998 they finally realized the further potential of their project: "Pretty soon, we had 10,000 searches a day. And we figured, maybe this is really real."

Some compared Page and Brin's vision to the impact of Johannes Gutenberg , the inventor of modern printing:

In 1440, Johannes Gutenberg introduced Europe to the mechanical printing press, printing Bibles for mass consumption. The technology allowed for books and manuscripts‍—‌originally replicated by hand‍—‌to be printed at a much faster rate, thus spreading knowledge and helping to usher in the European Renaissance ... Google has done a similar job.

The comparison was also noted by the authors of The Google Story : "Not since Gutenberg ... has any new invention empowered individuals, and transformed access to information, as profoundly as Google." Also, not long after the two "cooked up their new engine for web searches, they began thinking about information that was at the time beyond the web," such as digitizing books and expanding health information.

In June 2008, Brin invested $4.5 million in Space Adventures , a Virginia -based space tourism company.

Brin and Page jointly own a customized Boeing 767–200 and a Dassault/Dornier Alpha Jet , and pay $1.3 million a year to house them and two Gulfstream V jets owned by Google executives at Moffett Federal Airfield . The aircraft has scientific equipment installed by NASA to allow experimental data to be collected in flight.

Brin is a backer of LTA Research & Exploration LLC, an airship maker company. In October 2023, LTA's 124-meter long flagship, Pathfinder 1, became the largest airship since the Hindenburg to receive clearance for flight testing, permitted over the boundaries of Moffett Field and neighboring Palo Alto Airport ’s airspaces, at a height of up to 460 meters.

Brin was raised Jewish, but is not religious.

In May 2007, Brin married biotech analyst and entrepreneur Anne Wojcicki in the Bahamas . They had a son in late 2008 and a daughter in late 2011. In August 2013, it was announced that Brin and his wife were living separately after Brin had an extramarital affair with a Google Glass colleague. In June 2015, Brin and Wojcicki finalized their divorce.

On November 7, 2018, he married Nicole Shanahan , a legal tech founder. They have a daughter, born in late 2018. Brin and Shanahan separated on December 15, 2021, and Brin filed for divorce on January 4, 2022. In summer 2023, the divorce was finalized.

Brin's mother, Eugenia, has been diagnosed with Parkinson's disease . In 2008, he decided to make a donation to the University of Maryland School of Medicine , where his mother has received treatment. According to Forbes , Brin has donated over $1 billion to fund research on the disease.

Brin and Wojcicki, although divorced, jointly ran The Brin Wojcicki Foundation until 2014. Since then, Brin has used the Sergey Brin Family Foundation and a donor-advised fund for his philanthropic giving. They donated extensively to The Michael J. Fox Foundation and in 2009 gave $1 million to support the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society .

Brin is a donor to Democratic Party candidates and organizations, having donated $5,000 to Barack Obama 's reelection campaign and $30,800 to the DNC .