In telecommunication and data transmission , serial communication is the process of sending data one bit at a time, sequentially, over a communication channel or computer bus . This is in contrast to parallel communication , where several bits are sent as a whole, on a link with several parallel channels.

Serial communication is used for all long-haul communication and most computer networks , where the cost of cable and synchronization difficulties make parallel communication impractical. Serial computer buses have become more common even at shorter distances, as improved signal integrity and transmission speeds in newer serial technologies have begun to outweigh the parallel bus's advantage of simplicity (no need for serializer and deserializer, or SerDes ) and to outstrip its disadvantages ( clock skew , interconnect density). The migration from PCI to PCI Express (PCIe) is an example.

Modern high speed serial interfaces such as PCIe send data several bits at a time using modulation/encoding techniques such as PAM4 which groups 2 bits at a time into a single symbol, and several symbols are still sent one at the time. This replaces PAM2 or non return to zero (NRZ) which only sends one bit at a time, or in other words one bit per symbol. The symbols are sent at a speed known as the symbol rate or the baud rate.

Many serial communication systems were originally designed to transfer data over relatively large distances through some sort of data cable .

Practically all long-distance communication transmits data one bit at a time, rather than in parallel, because it reduces the cost of the cable. The cables that carry this data (other than "the" serial cable) and the computer ports they plug into are usually referred to with a more specific name, to reduce confusion.

Keyboard and mouse cables and ports are almost invariably serial—such as PS/2 port , Apple Desktop Bus and USB .

The cables that carry digital video are also mostly serial—such as coax cable plugged into a HD-SDI port, a webcam plugged into a USB port or FireWire port , Ethernet cable connecting an IP camera to a Power over Ethernet port, FPD-Link , digital telephone lines (ex. ISDN ), etc.

Other such cables and ports, transmitting data one bit at a time, include Serial ATA , Serial SCSI , Ethernet cable plugged into Ethernet ports , the Display Data Channel using previously reserved pins of the VGA connector or the DVI port or the HDMI port.

Many communication systems were generally designed to connect two integrated circuits on the same printed circuit board , connected by signal traces on that board (rather than external cables).

Integrated circuits are more expensive when they have more pins. To reduce the number of pins in a package, many ICs use a serial bus to transfer data when speed is not important. Some examples of such low-cost lower-speed serial buses include RS-232 , DALI , SPI , CAN bus , I²C , UNI/O , and 1-Wire . Higher-speed serial buses include USB , SATA and PCI Express .

The communication links, across which computers (or parts of computers) talk to one another, may be either serial or parallel. A parallel link transmits several streams of data simultaneously along multiple channels (e.g., wires, printed circuit tracks, or optical fibers); whereas, a serial link transmits only a single stream of data. The rationale for parallel communication was the added benefit of having Direct Memory Access to the 8-bit or 16-bit registry addresses at a time where mapping direct data lanes was more convenient and faster than synchronizing data serially.

Although a serial link may seem inferior to a parallel one, since it can transmit less data per clock cycle, it is often the case that serial links can be clocked considerably faster than parallel links in order to achieve a higher data rate. Several factors allow serial to be clocked at a higher rate:

The transition from parallel to serial buses was allowed by Moore's law which allowed for the incorporation of SerDes in integrated circuits. An electrical serial link only requires a pair of wires, whereas a parallel link requires several. Thus serial links can save on costs (also known as the Bill of Materials ). Differential signalling uses length-matched wires or conductors and are used in high speed serial links. Length-matching is easier to perform on serial links as they require fewer conductors.

In many cases, serial is cheaper to implement than parallel. Many ICs have serial interfaces, as opposed to parallel ones, so that they have fewer pins and are therefore less expensive.