Tamkang University ( TKU ; simplified Chinese : 淡江大学 ; traditional Chinese : 淡江大學 ; Pe̍h-ōe-jī : Tām-kang Tāi-ha̍k ) is a private university in Tamsui District , New Taipei City , Taiwan . It was founded in 1950 as a junior college of English. Today it is a comprehensive university with 11 colleges that serves nearly 25,000 students on four campuses (three traditional, one online).

Tamkang University is Taiwan's oldest private institution of higher learning and ranked among the top 1,500 universities worldwide in the 2022 Best Global Universities Rankings by U.S. News & World Report. Over 28,000 students of 50 nationalities form a diverse student body. Tamkang has partnerships with over 100 sister universities in 28 countries. The university's main campus in historic Tamsui is noted for its scenery.

Casually, members of the university community call themselves 'Tamkangians.'

Established in 1950 as a junior college of English, Tamkang first offered a two-year program and then a three-year program. It was not until 1958, after it was reorganized as a College of Arts and Sciences, that Tamkang awarded bachelor's degrees to its graduates. In 1980 Tamkang was elevated to the university status.

Today, Tamkang University has 11 colleges comprising 47 departments and divisions, 50 master's programs, and 17 doctoral programs. The total student enrollment is 28,075 and the number of faculty and staff members is 2,288.

The university has four campuses: the main campus in the Tamsui District of New Taipei City, the Taipei City campus, the Lanyang campus in Jiaoxi Township in Yilan County , and the online Cyber Campus.

Tamkang University developed in four broad stages.

The triple objectives of Globalization, Information-oriented Education, and Future-oriented Education are the foundation of Tamkang University's continuous management and development. Globalization is the spatial pattern of the future; Information-oriented Education, the life pattern of the future; and Future-oriented Education, the time frame of the future. The triple objectives are the time and spatial integration of Tamkang collective life system.

Globalization is based on the concept that all of humanity shares one globe. Moreover, through languages, words, and cultures, humans communicate with one another to promote mutual understanding. We form a global living community because we have only one planet. Under this concept, Tamkang establish the thinking mode that all Tamkangians must have a global mind, global soul and global action.

To construct the best information network and, at the same time, to actively complement the construction of hi-net so that via the network, Tamkang university is able to connect with the inter-collegiate network throughout the nation and with the international academic network throughout the world, to assist the university in instruction and research, and, more importantly, to strengthen human intelligence so as to cultivate Tamkangians to have the elements of "information with human nature" and "concern about humanity."

Based on "integrated sciences-oriented" and "future scenario-oriented" approaches, Tamkang must establish the future "vision" of Tamkang University. The 21st century is the age of continuity and discontinuity; Tamkangians have to understand the future, adapt to the future and, furthermore, create the best created future.

Tamkang University has accomplished its announced goal of "One Great University, Four Distinct Campuses." Managed according to a market model philosophy, academic and course arrangements are flexible. Goals are achieved through four strategies: differentiation, individualization, focus, and globalization.

Each campus offers specific functions in the realms of research, instruction, and services. A multi-disciplinary curriculum is being developed to meet the demands of students from widely varying backgrounds. The teaching resources of the four campuses remain integrated within one system.

The Tamkang University expresses its mission and identity through a family of symbols.

Architecture at the Tamkang University emphasizes dialogue between eastern and western motifs as well as between traditional and modern styles.

The words "Simplicity, Truthfulness, Firmness, and Perseverance" appear in the university anthem and motto. This motto is understood as expressing goals in the lives of Tamkangians.

The Tamkang University emblem, designed by artist Lan Yin-ting , evokes a giant bell associated by the ancients with timekeeping.
The Chinese characters「鐘鈴」"Chung Ling" literally mean "clock and bell." They also represent 鐘鈴」, the childhood name of Clement C. P. Chang , whose late father was Chang Ming, alias Ching-sheng. Tamkang uses the bell (鐘鈴) as university emblem to commemorate his father and carry forward the ancient tradition of big bells in education (see "Pa Yu" in Lun Yu). Confucius serves in Asian societies as an icon of educational mastery (木鐸); the bell thus shows two wings, symbolizing the spirit of "spreading the wings and flying high; soaring instantly and progressing swiftly." Engraved on the bell are two Chinese characters "Tam Kang."

The Overcoming Difficulty Slope is a steep stone staircase on the Tamsui campus. Built in 1953, the staircase consists of 132 stone steps. This staircase provided the only access to the school in its earliest days. Today it is taken as a symbol of the tenacity needed to gain knowledge and attain life goals.

Built in 1954, the school's first classroom buildings are modeled after Chinese classical palaces with green roofs and red walls. These evoke Confucian ideals of education.

The dolphin was chosen as a symbol of Tamkang University in a poll of students on all campuses. Dolphins are the most agile and intelligent mammals in the ocean and migrate all seven seas .

In the roundabout at the top end of the Lantern Road is a work by well-known contemporary sculptor Wang Shiu-chi . Engraved on the pillar-base of the milestone are four lines of phrases that Clement C. P. Chang often used to encourage Tamkangians: "Let's establish a firm foothold at Tamkang University/ Hold the whole world in view/ Grasp the latest information/ and create a bright future."

Situated in the center of the vast compound before the Ching-sheng Memorial Hall is the University Commons edifice, built in 1986 and designed by architect Lin Kuei-jung, a Tamkang alumnus. The structures form four tablets of bamboo encircling one another, "tzu chien" that represent ancient books (tzu chien = 竹卷). Seen from above, the design suggests the pivot of a motor, turning unceasingly.

Five Tiger Hill is the site of the Tamsui Campus. The Tatuen range crests at Hutou Shan (Tiger's Head Mountain) which has five ridges. Tamkang University is on the fourth ridge. A bronze sculpture on campus depicts five tigers embracing one another. The work, by Wang Shiu-chi , stands in front of the Shaomo Memorial Gymnasium and represents Tamkangians’ vitality ("Hu Hu Shen Fong"). The base features the text of Clement C. P. Chang's essay "The Five-tiger Hill: A Sketch."

The Tamkang Golden Eagle Award for "Tamkang Elites" was initiated in 1987. The award recognizes Tamkangians who have made especially distinguished contributions to human society. The Award is in the form of a golden eagle spreading its wings.

The Rising Sun Above Hsuehshan Tunnel (Love of Lanyang and Devotion to Tamkang): The sculpture portraying the Hsuehshan Tunnel of the Taipei-Yilan Expressway was presented to Clement C. P. Chang in 1990 by the Association for Promotion of the Taipei-Yilan Rapid Transit System.

It is the work of Zerman Hu and Lanyang master sculptor Yu Yu Yang (Yang Ying-feng) and was commissioned by the Yilan Association, Taipei Chapter. The original sculpture was made from gilded stainless steel in the form of an ancient Chinese hieroglyph "山" (shan meaning "mountain"). The sculpture portrays the Hsuehshan Tunnel, the mountain itself (Hsuehshan = Snow Mountain), the rising sun shining over Lanyang, and the Pacific Ocean.

To celebrate the completion of the Lanyang Campus and the opening of the Taipei-Yilan Expressway, the university asked Arthur Yang, son of Yu Yu Yang, to render the original sculpture as a stainless-steel artwork 241 cm high and 270 cm wide. This larger sculpture is installed at the entrance to the Clement Chang International Conference Hall on the Lanyang Campus. The sculpture pays homage to the unsung heroes who built the expressway and symbolizes the university's Tamsui-Yilan connection.

Admission to Tamkang University is selective. Requirements vary with the nature of the program and the applicants.

Taiwan residents are admitted after undergoing open screening procedures to review qualifications and examination scores. Applicants should be either high school graduates (or the equivalent) or graduates of a 3- or 5-year vocational college.

International students apply between February 1 and May 15 for admission directly to the Admissions Section of the Office of Academic Affairs of the university or the nearest Taiwan overseas representative office.

The university offers limited opportunities to transfer into undergraduate programs. Admission is based on scores earned in the Entrance Examination for Transfer Students held each July at the university. International students apply directly to the Admissions or Registration Section of the Office of Academic Affairs for transfer to a department related to their previous training.

Tamkang University offers doctoral and master's degrees.

Seventeen Ph.D. degrees are offered in Chinese, English, Chemistry, Physics, American Studies, Management Sciences and Decision Making, Computer Science and Information Engineering, Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, Mathematics, Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Banking and Finance, Industrial Economics, Mechanical and Electro-Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and European Studies.

Master's degrees are offered in 49 fields including liberal arts, science, engineering, business, management, education, English, and Chinese literature.

Students from Tamkang's sister universities who wish to study at Tamkang University as exchange students should apply directly to the Office of International Studies of their respective university.

Tamkang has more than 220,000 alumni residing all over the world, contributing in all walks of life with outstanding performance. Hence, Tamkang's alumni are voted the most popular in the business industry for ten consecutive years. To present current developments and future visions of the alma mater to alumni, each year Tamkang holds the "Feast of Spring" in March, inviting local and overseas alumni back to Tamkang to revisit the garden campus and its advanced instructional facilities, attend departmental forum, and share with current students their experiences on further education or employment.

Therefore, by presenting growths and improvements, Tamkang hopes to receive further support and acknowledgement from alumni. Moreover, with the aims of creating a higher academic reputation and becoming a world-class university, support, acknowledgement, as well as donations and gifts are all important foundations for Tamkang's future developments.