Technical writing is a specialized form of communication used by many of today's industrial and scientific organizations to clearly and accurately convey complex information to a user. An organization's customers, employees, assembly workers, engineers, and scientists are some of the most common users who reference this form of content to complete a task or research a subject. Most technical writing relies on simplified grammar, supported by easy-to-understand visual communication to clearly and accurately explain complex information.

Technical writing is a labor-intensive form of writing that demands accurate research of a subject and the conversion of the collected information into a written format, style, and reading level the end-user will easily understand or connect with. There are two main forms of technical writing. By far, the most common form of technical writing is procedural documentation written for the general public (e.g., standardized step-by-step guides and standard operating procedures (SOPs)). Procedural technical writing is used in all types of manufacturing to explain user operation, assembly, installation instructions, and personnel work/safety steps. Written procedures are widely used in manufacturing, software development, medical research, and many other scientific fields. The software industry has grown into one of the largest users of technical writing and relies on procedural documents to describe a program's user operation and installation instructions.

In some applications, technical writing may be written for experts or fellow scientists within a field of work or study. In these applications, a "white paper" form of technical writing is used to describe a specialized topic and market a product/service or opinion/discovery to select readers. Organizations normally use the white paper form to publish technical writing as industry journal articles or academic papers. The white paper form is written to appeal to readers familiar with a technical topic. Unlike procedural technical writing, white papers often include unique industry terms and data. Sometimes called scientific technical writing , this secondary form of technical writing must show a deep knowledge of a subject and the field of work with the sole purpose of persuading readers to agree with a paper's conclusion. This form of technical writing is often ghost written by a technical writer. A technical writer will closely collaborate with an organization's industry expert to author these documents but is rarely credited in the published version.

In most cases, however, technical writing is used to help convey complex scientific or niche subjects to end users in "laymen's" terms and includes purely factual content. Modern procedural technical writing relies on simple terms and short sentences, rather than detailed explanations with unnecessary information like personal pronouns, abstract words and unfamiliar acronyms. To achieve the right grammar; procedural docs are written from a third-person, objective perspective, with an active voice and formal tone. A more complete description of the technical writing style is provided in Strunk and White's book The Elements of Style . Technical writing grammar is very similar to print journalism and follows the same style. Although technical writing plays an integral role in the work of engineering, health care, and science; it does not require a degree in any of these fields. Instead, the document's author must be an expert in technical writing. An organization's Subject Matter Experts (SMEs), internal specifications, and a formal engineering review process are relied upon to ensure accuracy. The division of labor helps bring greater focus to the two sides of an organization's documentation, ensuring greater accuracy and quality. Most technical writers hold a liberal arts degree in a writing discipline, such as technical communication, journalism, English, technical journalism, communication, etc. Technical writing is the largest segment of the technical communication field.

Examples of fields requiring technical writing include computer hardware and software , architecture , engineering , chemistry , aeronautics , robotics , manufacturing , finance , medical , patent law , consumer electronics , biotechnology , and forestry .

Technical writing is most commonly performed by a trained technical writer and the content they produce is the result of a well-defined process. Technical writers follow strict guidelines so the technical information they share appears in a single, popularly used and standardized format and style (e.g., DITA , markdown format , AP Stylebook , Chicago Manual of Style ). A technical writer's primary task is to communicate technical information in the clearest and most effective manner possible. To achieve the highest level of clarity, the authors of an organization's technical writing should be indistinguishable to the reader - with no variations in the established format, grammar, and/or style.  The subject matter a technical writer communicates is often complex, so strong writing and communication skills are essential. Technical writers not only convey information through text, but they must be proficient with the latest graphics software. Technical writers use a wide range of programs to create and edit illustrations , diagrams, and CAD explosions. Proficiency in the latest graphics software is a requirement for most technical writing.

In some cases, engineers may perform the technical writing for the project they are working on, but this rarely occurs in large organizations where products must be released or revised weekly. On the business side, marketing materials or press releases are usually written by writers trained in a marketing field and/or creative writing. However, a technical writer may be relied upon to provide editing and other input on any technical content an organization may produce.

While technical writing has only been recognized as a profession since World War II , its roots can be traced to ancient Egypt where visual communication was regularly used to explain procedures. In ancient Greek and Roman times, technical writing by the works of writers like Aristotle and Democratus are cited as some of the earliest forms of written technical writing. The earliest examples of what would be considered modern procedural technical writing date back to the early alchemists . These early scientists developed what we now know as " recipes ". Some of the earliest discoveries of written, procedural steps in Western Civilization date back to 1100 A.D. However, visual communication was used to describe procedures in ancient India and China much earlier.

With the invention of the mechanical printing press , the onset of the Renaissance and the rise of the Age of Reason , documenting findings became a necessity. Inventors and scientists like Isaac Newton and Leonardo da Vinci prepared documents that chronicled their inventions and findings. While never called technical documents during their period of publication, these documents played a crucial role in developing modern forms of technical communication and writing.

The field of technical communication grew during the Industrial Revolution . There was a growing need to provide people with instructions for using the increasingly complex machines that were being invented. However, unlike the past, where skills were handed down through oral traditions, no one besides the inventors knew how to use these new devices. Writing thus became the fastest and most effective way to disseminate information, and writers who could document these devices were desired.

During the 20th century, the need for technical writing skyrocketed, and the profession became officially recognized. The events of World War I and World War II led to advances in medicine, military hardware, computer technology, and aerospace technologies. This rapid growth, coupled with the urgency of war, created an immediate need for well-designed documentation to support the use of these technologies. Technical writing was in high demand during this time, and "technical writer" became an official job title during World War II.

Following World War II , technological advances led to an increase in consumer goods and standards of living. During the post-war boom, public services like libraries and universities, as well as transport systems like buses and highways, saw substantial growth. The need for writers to chronicle these processes increased. It was also during this period that large business and universities started using computers. Notably, in 1949, Joseph D. Chapline authored the first computational technical document, an instruction manual for the BINAC computer.

The invention of the transistor in 1947 allowed computers to be produced more cheaply and within the purchasing range of individuals and small businesses. As the market for these " personal computers " grew, so did the need for writers who could explain and provide user documentation for these devices. The profession of technical writing saw further expansion during the 1970s and 1980s as consumer electronics found their way into the homes of more and more people.

In recent years, the prominence of computers in society has led to many advances in the field of digital communications, leading to changes in the tools technical writers use. Hypertext , word processors , graphics editing programs , and page laying software have made the creation of technical documents faster and easier, and technical writers of today must be proficient in these programs.

Technical writing covers many genres and writing styles, depending on the information and audience. Some examples of commonly used technical documentation include:

The following tools are used by technical writers to author and present documents: