Invincible Robo Trider G7 ( 無敵ロボトライダーＧ７ , Muteki Robo Toraidā Jī Sebun ) is a Japanese mecha anime television series produced by Sunrise that aired from 1980 to 1981. It was also referred to as " Trider G7 ", " Unchallengeable Trider G7 ", " Tryder G7 ", " Bird Attack Tryder G7 " and " Unrivaled Robot Trider G7 ".

The story follows sixth-grader Watta Takeo's life as he balances his school life, being the president of a company, and battling a robotic empire from outer space. While a Super Robot series at heart, it depicts a realistic take on the genre, such as announcing to nearby citizens that Trider G7 was being activated and having to consider the monetary expenses of battle.

Invincible Robo Trider G7 portrays the attempted alien invasion by the Robot Empire to take over Earth. Rebelling against this, the scientist Nabalon, who was exiled from the Empire, meets the protagonist Watta's father, and together, they design the transforming robot Trider G7.

Watta's father dies in an accident, and Watta has no choice but to succeed him at both his job and piloting Trider. As the president of the Takeo General Company, Watta must now fight to ensure everyone's happiness, as well as the condition of the company's funds.

The narration in the show was performed by Ichirou Nagai, who did the narration for Mobile Suit Gundam. Up until that point, many series airing on TV Asahi in the series' timeslot had their soundtracks composed by Takeo Watanabe and Yuushi Matsuyama , but as the two were working on the soundtrack for the theatrical adaptation of Mobile Suit Gundam , Kurando Kaya filled in the role.

Rather than depicting robots as a military weapon like Mobile Suit Gundam did, the aim of the story was to portray how a giant robot would be operated in the real world. Trider G7's own unrealistic abilities are explained with scientists that were exiled from the enemy empire, as Trider G7's capabilities are far beyond that of the other Earth-made robots in the show. In addition, the Robot Empire was notable compared to other villains from contemporary mecha series by having little to no interaction with the human protagonists, as they are unaware that their own scientists built Trider G7.

Invincible Robo Trider G7 aired from February 2, 1980 until January 24, 1981, spanning 50 episodes. It was also broadcast in Italy in 1981 under the name L'Indistruttibile Robot Trider G7 . As with other super robot shows of the time, toys of the titular robot were produced by the toy company Clover.

A DVD boxset of the series was released in 2005, and an Italian boxset was released in 2012 which contains both the Italian dub and the original Japanese audio. The series has been featured in various installments of the Super Robot Wars franchise of video games as well, including Shin Super Robot Wars and the Super Robot Wars Z metaseries.