The turbot (English: / ˈ t ɜːr b ə t / TUR -bət , French: [tyʁbo] .; Scophthalmus maximus )  is a relatively large species of flatfish in the family Scophthalmidae . It is a demersal fish native to marine or brackish waters of the Northeast Atlantic, Baltic Sea and the Mediterranean Sea . It is an important food fish. Turbot in the Black Sea have often been included in this species, but are now generally regarded as separate, the Black Sea turbot or kalkan ( S. maeoticus ). True turbot are not found in the Northwest Atlantic; the "turbot" of that region, which was involved in the so-called " Turbot War " between Canada and Spain, is the Greenland halibut or Greenland turbot ( Reinhardtius hippoglossoides ).

The word comes from the Old French tourbout , which may be a derivative of the Latin turbo ('spinning top'), a possible reference to its shape. Another possible origin of the Old French word is from Old Swedish törnbut , from törn 'thorn' + -but 'stump, butt, flatfish', which may also be a reference to its shape (compare native English halibut ). Early reference to the turbot can be found in a satirical poem (" The Emperor's Fish ") by Juvenal , a Roman poet of the late 1st and early 2nd centuries AD, suggesting this fish was a delicacy in the Roman empire .

The turbot is a large left eyed flatfish found primarily close to shore in sandy shallow waters throughout the Mediterranean , the Baltic Sea , the Black Sea , and the North Atlantic . The European turbot has an asymmetric disk-shaped body, and has been known to grow up to one metre (40 inches) long and 25 kilograms (55 pounds) in weight.

Turbot is highly prized as a food fish for its delicate flavour, and is also known as brat , breet , britt , or butt . It is a valuable commercial species, acquired through aquaculture and trawling. Turbot are farmed in Bulgaria , Canada , France , Spain , Portugal , Romania , Turkey , Chile , Norway , and China . Turbot has a bright white flesh that retains this appearance when cooked. Like all flatfish, turbot yields four fillets with meatier topside portions that may be baked , poached , steamed , or pan-fried .