Universal design is the design of buildings, products or environments to make them accessible to people, regardless of age , disability , or other factors. It emerged as a rights -based, anti- discrimination measure, which seeks to create design for all abilities. Evaluating material and structures that can be utilized by all. It addresses common barriers to participation by creating things that can be used by the maximum number of people possible. “ When disabling mechanisms are to be replaced with mechanisms for inclusion , different kinds of knowledge are relevant for different purposes. As a practical strategy for inclusion, Universal Design involves dilemmas and often difficult priorities.” Curb cuts or sidewalk ramps, which are essential for people in wheelchairs but also used by all, are a common example of universal design.

The term universal design was coined by the architect Ronald Mace to describe the concept of designing all products and the built environment to be aesthetic and usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone, regardless of their age, ability, or status in life. However, due to some people having unusual or conflicting access needs, such as a person with low vision needing bright light and a person with photophobia needing dim light, universal design does not address absolutely every need for every person in every situation.

Universal design emerged from slightly earlier barrier-free concepts, the broader accessibility movement, and adaptive and assistive technology and also seeks to blend aesthetics into these core considerations. As life expectancy rises and modern medicine increases the survival rate of those with significant injuries, illnesses, and birth defects, there is a growing interest in universal design. There are many industries in which universal design is having strong market penetration but there are many others in which it has not yet been adopted to any great extent. Universal design is also being applied to the design of technology, instruction, services, and other products and environments. Several different fields, such as engineering, architecture, and medicine collaborate in order to effectively create accessible environments that can lend to inclusion for a variety of disabilities. It can change the socio-material relationships people have with spaces and environments and create positive experiences for all kinds of abilities. Which allows for meaningful participation across multiple demographics experiencing disability.

In 1960, specifications for barrier-free design were published as a compendium of over 11 years of disability ergonomic research. In 1961, the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) A1171.1 specifications were published as the first Barrier Free Design standard. It presented criteria for designing facilities and programs for use by individuals with disabilities. The research started in 1949 at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and continues to this day. The principal investigator, Dr. Timothy Nugent , who is credited in the 1961, 1971, and 1980 standards, also started the National Wheelchair Basketball Association .

The ANSI A117.1 standard was adopted by the US federal government General Services Administration under the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) in 1984, then in 1990 for American with Disabilities Act (ADA) . The archived research documents are at the International Code Council (ICC) - ANSI A117.1 division. Dr. Nugent made presentations around the globe in the late 1950s and 1960s presenting the concept of independent functional participation for individuals with disabilities through program options and architectural design.

Another comprehensive publication by the Royal Institute of British Architects published three editions 1963, 1967, 1976 and 1997 of Designing for the Disabled by Selwyn Goldsmith UK. These publications contain valuable empirical data and studies of individuals with disabilities. Both standards are excellent resources for the designer and builder.

Disability ergonomics should be taught to designers, engineers, non-profits executives to further the understanding of what makes an environment wholly tenable and functional for individuals with disabilities.

In October 2003, representatives from China , Japan , and South Korea met in Beijing and agreed to set up a committee to define common design standards for a wide range of products and services that are easy to understand and use. Their goal is to publish a standard in 2004 which covers, among other areas, standards on containers and wrappings of household goods (based on a proposal from experts in Japan), and standardization of signs for public facilities, a subject which was of particular interest to China as it prepared to host the 2008 Summer Olympics .

Selwyn Goldsmith , author of Designing for the Disabled (1963), pioneered the concept of free access for people with disabilities. His most significant achievement was the creation of the dropped curb – now a standard feature of the built environment.

The term Design for All (DfA) is used to describe a design philosophy targeting the use of products, services and systems by as many people as possible without the need for adaptation. "Design for All is design for human diversity, social inclusion and equality" (EIDD Stockholm Declaration, 2004). According to the European Commission , it "encourages manufacturers and service providers to produce new technologies for everyone: technologies that are suitable for the elderly and people with disabilities , as much as the teenage techno wizard." The origin of Design for All lies in the field of barrier-free accessibility for people with disabilities and the broader notion of universal design.

Design for All has been highlighted in Europe by the European Commission in seeking a more user-friendly society in Europe. Design for All is about ensuring that environments, products, services and interfaces work for people of all ages and abilities in different situations and under various circumstances.

Design for All has become a mainstream issue because of the aging of the population and its increasingly multi-ethnic composition. It follows a market approach and can reach out to a broader market. Easy-to-use, accessible, affordable products and services improve the quality of life of all citizens. Design for All permits access to the built environment, access to services and user-friendly products which are not just a quality factor but a necessity for many aging or disabled persons. Including Design for All early in the design process is more cost-effective than making alterations after solutions are already in the market. This is best achieved by identifying and involving users ("stakeholders") in the decision-making processes that lead to drawing up the design brief and educating public and private sector decision-makers about the benefits to be gained from making coherent use of Design (for All) in a wide range of socio-economic situations

Design for All criteria are aimed at ensuring that everyone can participate in the Information society . The European Union refers to this under the terms eInclusion and eAccessibility. A three-way approach is proposed: goods which can be accessed by nearly all potential users without modification or, failing that, products being easy to adapt according to different needs, or using standardized interfaces that can be accessed simply by using assistive technology. To this end, manufacturers and service providers, especially, but not exclusively, in the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), produce new technologies, products, services and applications for everyone.

In Europe, people have joined in networks to promote and develop Design for All:

The Center for Universal Design at North Carolina State University expounded the following principles:

Each principle is broader than those of accessible design or barrier-free design contains and few brief guidelines that can be applied to design processes in any realm: physical or digital.

In 2012, the Center for Inclusive Design and Environmental Access at the University at Buffalo expanded the definition of the principles of universal design to include social participation and health and wellness. Rooted in evidence based design, the 8 goals of universal design were also developed.

The first four goals are oriented to human performance: anthropometry , biomechanics , perception , cognition . Wellness bridges human performance and social participation. The last three goals addresses social participation outcomes. The definition and the goals are expanded upon in the textbook "Universal Design: Creating Inclusive Environments."

Barrier-free ( バリアフリー , bariafurii ) building modification consists of modifying buildings or facilities so that they can be used by people who are disabled or have physical impairments. The term is used primarily in Japan and other non-English speaking countries (e.g. German: Barrierefreiheit ; Finnish: esteettömyys ), while in English-speaking countries, terms such as " accessibility " and "accessible" dominate in everyday use. An example of barrier-free design would be installing a ramp for wheelchair users alongside steps. In the late 1990s, any element which could make the use of the environment inconvenient was considered a barrier , for example poor public street lighting. In the case of new buildings, however, the idea of barrier-free modification has largely been superseded by the concept of universal design, which seeks to design things from the outset to support easy access.

Freeing a building of barriers means:

Barrier-free is also a term that applies to accessibility in situations where legal codes such as the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 applies. The process of adapting barrier-free public policies started when the Veterans Administration and US President's Committee on Employment of the Handicapped noticed a large amount of US citizens coming back from the Vietnam War injured and unable to navigate public spaces . The ADA is a law focusing on all building aspects, products and design that is based on the concept of respecting human rights. It doesn't contain design specifications directly.

An example of a country that has sought to implement barrier-free accessibility in housing estates is Singapore. Within five years, all public housing estates in the country, all 7,800 blocks of apartments, have benefited from the program.

The types of Universal Design elements vary dependent on the targeted population and the space. For example, in public spaces, universal design elements are often broad areas of accessibility while in private spaces, design elements address the specific requirements of the resident. Examples of these design elements are varied and leverage different approaches for different effects. Some examples include:

The following examples of Designs for All were presented in the book Diseños para todos/Designs for All published in 2008 by Optimastudio with the support of Spain's Ministry of Education, Social Affairs and Sports ( IMSERSO ) and CEAPAT:

Other useful items for those with mobility limitations:

The Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center (RERC) on universal design in the Built Environment funded by what is now the National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation Research completed its activities on September 29, 2021. Twenty RERCs are currently funded. The Center for Inclusive Design and Environmental Access at the University at Buffalo is a current recipient.

One study conducted in Aswan, Egypt published in the Journal of Engineering and Applied Science aimed to explore the accessibility in three administrative buildings in the area. They were looking for universal design in entrances and exits, circulation of traffic within the building, and wayfinding within the building's services. They decided to focus their case study on administrative buildings in order to exemplify universal design that granted access for all citizens to all locations. Among the buildings, there were some shared issues. The researchers found that vertical movement was difficult for disabled patrons, given that there were no elevators. There was also no dropped curb, no Braille system, and the handles of doors were difficult to open, and there were no sensory indicators such as sounds or visual signs.

This case highlights the importance if demographics when considering needs for universal design. Over 60% of the citizens who use this building on a daily basis are elderly, but there aren't accommodations that are helpful to their capabilities. Along with the lack of tactile features to guide the visually impaired, the space within the building is very congested, especially for one who may not have full physical capabilities and must use a wheelchair. The circulation suffers as a result, as well as the wayfinding in the structure.

Although there have been attempts to create more accessible public and outdoor spaces, the restorations made have ultimately failed to meet the needs of the disabled and elderly.