University of Kerala , formerly the University of Travancore , is a state-run public university in Thiruvananthapuram , the state capital of Kerala , India. It was established in 1937 by a promulgation of the Maharajah of Travancore , Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma who was also the first Chancellor of the university. C. P. Ramaswamy Iyer , the then Diwan (Prime Minister) of the State was the first Vice-Chancellor. It was the first university in Kerala, and among the first in the country. It is accredited by NAAC with highest grade of A++ and scored 3.67 points out of 4.

The university has over 150 affiliated colleges and has sixteen faculties and 43 Departments of teaching and research. The Governor of Kerala serves as the Chancellor of university.

The history of the University of Kerala is integral to the history of the state itself. One of the first 16 Universities in India, the University of Kerala was founded in 1937. It was formerly called the University of Travancore in the erstwhile princely state of Travancore (now southern part of Kerala and some neighbouring parts of state of Tamilnadu). The University came into being by a promulgation of the Maharajah of Travancore, Sri Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma who was also the first Chancellor of the University. Sir C. P Ramaswamy Ayyar, the then Diwan (Prime minister) of the State was the first Vice-Chancellor. He was an eminent scholar and an able administrator. It is said that the Government made an unsuccessful attempt to invite Albert Einstein to be the first Vice-Chancellor. The University was modelled after the best Universities of the United Kingdom, and even today retains some of these features. The affiliating system of the University however evolved differently from the college system in British Universities.

The earliest origins of the University may be traced back to two institutions of modern learning in Kerala - the University College Thiruvananthapuram and the Trivandrum Observatory . The University College was initially founded as the Maharaja's Free School by Maharaja Swathi Thirunal in 1834, with Mr John Roberts, a Christian Missionary as Headmaster, and soon grew into a college in 1866, affiliated to the Madras University. When the University of Travancore was founded, the departments of the college became University departments, only to switch back again when the transformation to University of Kerala happened in 1957. The University College still retains its connection with the University as an affiliated college. The Thiruvananthapuram Observatory was founded in 1838 and had an internationally reputed scientist, John Caldecott FRS as its first Director. It became a part of the Travancore University, but was administered as an independent government institution for some time. It is now the oldest institution under the Kerala University.

The Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the Vice- Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, and the members of the Senate, the Syndicate and the Academic Council constitutes the governing body of the university. The Governor of Kerala is the Chancellor of the university while Education Minister of Kerala is the Pro-Chancellor of the university.

It was ranked 21st among universities and 38th overall by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in 2024.

Notable alumni includes tenth President of India K. R. Narayanan , renowned theoretical physicist Thanu Padmanabhan , geneticist M. S. Swaminathan , ISRO former Chairman G. Madhavan Nair , INSA scientist Perdur Radhakantha Adiga , former Supreme Court judges, Justice Kurian Joseph , Justice Fathima Beevi , legal luminary N. R. Madhava Menon , Indian film actor Mohanlal , Malayalam poets O. N. V. Kurup , Sugathakumari , Music composer G. Devarajan , historian M. G. S. Narayanan , cricketer Sanju Samson and many other eminent personalities.