User-centered design ( UCD ) or user-driven development ( UDD ) is a framework of processes (not restricted to interfaces or technologies) in which usability goals, user characteristics, environment , tasks and workflow of a product , service or process are given extensive attention at each stage of the design process . These tests are conducted with or without actual users during each stage of the process from requirements , pre-production models and post production, completing a circle of proof back to and ensuring that "development proceeds with the user as the center of focus." Such testing is necessary as it is often very difficult for the designers of a product to understand intuitively the experiences of first-time users, and what each user's learning curve may look like. User-centered design is based on the understanding of a user, their demands, priorities and experiences and when used, is known to lead to an increased product usefulness and usability as it delivers satisfaction to the user. User-centered design applies cognitive science principles to create intuitive, efficient products by understanding users' mental processes, behaviors, and needs.

The chief difference from other product design philosophies is that user-centered design tries to optimize the product around how users can, want, or need to use it so that users are not forced to change their behavior and expectations to accommodate the product. The users thus stand in the center of two concentric circles. The inner circle includes the context of the product, the objectives of developing it, and the environment it would run in. The outer circle involves more granular details of task detail, task organization, and task flow.

The term "User-Centered Design" was coined by Rob Kling in 1977 and later adopted in Donald A. Norman's research laboratory at the University of California, San Diego . The concept became widely popular as a result of the publication of the book User-Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction in 1986. The concept gained further attention and acceptance in Norman's seminal book The Design of Everyday Things (originally called The Psychology of Everyday Things ). In this book, Norman describes the psychology behind what he deems 'good' and 'bad' design through examples. He exalts the importance of design in our everyday lives and the consequences of errors caused by bad designs.

The two books include principles for building well-designed products. His recommendations are based on the user's needs, leaving aside what he considers secondary issues like aesthetics. The main highlights of these are:

In a later book, Emotional Design , Norman returns to some of his earlier ideas to elaborate what he had come to find as overly reductive.

The User-Centered Design process can help software designers fulfill the goal of a product engineered for their users. User requirements are considered right from the beginning and included in the whole product cycle. These requirements are noted and refined through investigative methods including: ethnographic study, contextual inquiry , prototype testing, usability testing and other methods. Generative methods may also be used including: card sorting , affinity diagramming and participatory design sessions. In addition, user requirements can be inferred by careful analysis of usable products similar to the product being designed.

User-Centered Design takes inspiration from the following models:

Here are the principles that help in ensuring a design is user-centered:

The goal of user-centered design is to make products with a high degree of usability such as how convenient is the product usage, manageability, effectiveness, and how well the product is mapped to the user requirements. Below are the general phases of User-Centered Design process:

The above procedure is repeated in the next steps to finish the product further. These phases are general approaches and factors like design goals, team and their timeline, and environment in which the product is developed, determine the appropriate phases for a project and their order. You can either follow a waterfall model , agile model or any other software engineering practice.

There are a number of tools that are used in the analysis of User-Centered Design, mainly: personas, scenarios, and essential use cases.

During the UCD process, a Persona representing the user may be created. A persona is a user archetype used to help guide decisions about product features, navigation, interactions, and even visual design. In most cases, personas are synthesized from a series of ethnographic interviews with real people, then captured in 1-2 page descriptions that include behavior patterns, goals, skills, attitudes, and environment, with a few fictional personal details to bring the persona to life.