Xcas is a user interface to Giac , which is an open source computer algebra system (CAS) for Windows , macOS and Linux among many other platforms. Xcas is written in C++ . Giac can be used directly inside software written in C++.

Xcas has compatibility modes with many popular algebra systems like WolframAlpha , Mathematica , Maple , or MuPAD . Users can use Giac/Xcas to develop formal algorithms or use it in other software. Giac is used in SageMath for calculus operations. Among other things, Xcas can solve equations (Figure 3) and differential equations (Figure 4) and draw graphs . There is a forum for questions about Xcas.

CmathOOoCAS , an OpenOffice.org plugin which allows formal calculation in Calc spreadsheet and Writer word processing, uses Giac to perform calculations.

Here is a brief overview of what Xcas is able to do:

Example Xcas commands:

Xcas and Giac are open-source projects developed and written by Bernard Parisse [ fr ] and Renée De Graeve at the former Joseph Fourier University of Grenoble (now the Grenoble Alpes University ), France since 2000. Xcas and Giac are based on experiences gained with Parisse's former project Erable . Pocket CAS and CAS Calc P11 utilize Giac.

The system was also chosen by Hewlett-Packard as the CAS for their HP Prime calculator, which utilizes the Giac/Xcas 1.5.0 engine under a dual-license scheme.

In 2013, the mathematical software Xcas was also integrated into GeoGebra 's CAS view.

Since 2015, Xcas is used in the French education system . Xcas is also used in German universities , and in Spain and Mexico . It is also used at the University of North Carolina Wilmington and the University of New Mexico . Xcas is used in particular for learning algebra.

There is a port of Giac/Xcas for Casio graphing calculators : fx-CG10, fx-CG20, fx-CG50, fx-9750GIII, fx-9860GIII, called χCAS (KhiCAS) . These calculators do not have their own computer algebra system . It is also available for TI Nspire CX, CX-II , and Numworks N0110