The American Nuclear Society (ANS) is an international, not-for-profit organization of scientists, engineers, and industry professionals that promote the field of nuclear engineering and related disciplines.

ANS is composed of three communities: professional divisions, local sections/plant branches, and student sections. Individual members consist of fellows, professional members, and student members. Various organization members are also included in the Society including corporations, governmental agencies, educational institutions, and associations.

As of spring 2024, ANS is composed of more than 10,000 members from more than 40 countries. ANS is also a member of the International Nuclear Societies Council (INSC).

Professional Divisions within the American Nuclear Society focus on specific technical domains, encompassing 18 areas and the Young Members Group. They provide members with specialized engagement opportunities in nuclear science and technology. ANS members can join any number of these divisions. Their activities are coordinated by the Professional Divisions Committee. Topics covered by the divisions range from Accelerator Applications to Fusion Energy and more.

The main objectives of ANS are to provide professional development opportunities for members, engage and inform the public and students about the benefits of nuclear technology , encourage innovation in the nuclear field, and advocate effectively for nuclear technology at both domestic and international levels.

The American Nuclear Society was founded in 1954 as a not-for-profit association to promote the growing nuclear field. Shortly thereafter in 1955, ANS held its first annual meeting and elected Walter Zinn as its first president. Originally headquartered in space provided by the Oak Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies (ORINS), the Society's headquarters were moved to various locations over the years until 1977 in which the Society settled into its own headquarters building in La Grange Park, Illinois .

The American Nuclear Society published "Fusion technology : a journal of the American Nuclear Society and the European Nuclear Society" from 1984 to 2001.

The American Nuclear Society publishes various journals, magazines, newsletters, and books.

The American Nuclear Society consists of student sections at colleges and universities throughout the United States and abroad. As of spring 2020, the table below lists the active student sections of ANS.

Throughout the US and the world, numerous Local sections constitute the foundation of ANS. Members are encouraged to affiliate with a Local Section or Plant Branch to expand their professional connections and contribute to public education and outreach in the nuclear sector.