The American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) was a Washington, D.C. –based national trade association formed in 1974, representing wind power project developers, equipment suppliers, service providers, parts manufacturers, utilities, researchers, and others involved in the wind industry.

AWEA promoted wind energy as a clean source of electricity for consumers in the U.S. and around the world and has around 1,000 member organizations.

The group was succeeded in January 2021 by the American Clean Power Association .

AWEA staff lobby the U.S. Congress to promote policies encouraging investment in wind energy and provide statistics and data on the wind industry.  Additionally, they make policy recommendations and testify on various issues.

AWEA supports policies which it asserts will generate investment in the U.S. economy, improve U.S. energy security, and slow climate change , including extension of the federal Production Tax Credit (PTC) and Investment Tax Credit (ITC) for wind energy, establishment of a national Renewable Electricity Standard (RES), adoption of climate change policy that recognizes wind energy as a major near-term option for reducing greenhouse gas emissions , support for efforts to strengthen and expand the U.S. electric transmission system, and support for a strong federal wind energy research program.

AWEA hosts the annual WINDPOWER Conference & Exhibition, which is the largest annual wind conference and exhibition in the world.  WINDPOWER features an exhibition of wind energy technology, including large-scale components, as well as presentations on industry trends, technology developments, and renewable energy policy developments.

In December 2009, AWEA coordinated with the Telecommunications Industry Association 's Engineering Committee, to research and formulate recommendations to address the technical aspects of the design and maintenance of structures supporting small wind turbines based upon the approaches outlined in the existing communications tower standard.

AWEA's current CEO is Tom Kiernan. Kiernan was formerly President of the National Parks Conservation Association.