Android 15 is the fifteenth major release and the 22nd version of Android . The first developer preview was released in February 2024. The Android 15 source code was released on September 3, 2024. On September 3, 2024, Google confirmed that Android 15 will be released to Pixel phones in "the coming weeks". In addition, leaks have suggested that the stable release to Pixel phones could be on October 15th.

Android 15 is internally codenamed "Vanilla Ice Cream".

The first developer preview (also known as DP1) for Android 15 was released on 16 February 2024. The second developer preview (DP2) was released on 21 March 2024.

The official DP1 release notes state that the following features will be introduced in Android 15:

However, enthusiasts have discovered the existence of other under development features that may be released in later developer preview versions, such as the reintroduction of lockscreen widgets, which were introduced in Android 4.2 but later removed in Android 5.0 . Other such features include battery health determination, app archiving, voice activation, private space and app pairs and an improved multi-tasking/windowing in desktop mode.

The release of DP2 brought more new features to Android 15, including improved compatibility with satellite networks, improvements to the built-in PDF reader and support for app archiving, among many other developments.

The release of Beta 1 came with new features, such as apps being able to scale edge-to-edge and draw translucent system bars on the top and bottom of the screen, OS-level support for app archiving and unarchiving on third-party app stores, better braille support, end-to-end encryption for contact keys, and many other new developer features.

Beta 2 brought additional improvements, including a redesigned authentication panel, improved privacy and security settings, a new volume panel, predictive back and Bluetooth audio fixes.

Alongside platform stability, Beta 3 added a redesigned credentials manager and the deprecation of WebSQL .

Android 15 will be based on Linux kernel version 6.6.