The architecture of Uttar Pradesh demonstrates a diverse and eclectic combination of Buddhist , Hindu , Indo-Islamic , and Indo-European architectural styles . Three of its architectural monuments—the Taj Mahal , the Agra Fort , as well as the township of Fatehpur Sikri founded by the Mughal emperor Akbar —are designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites . The architectural structures in Uttar Pradesh include ancient Buddhist stūpas and vihāras , ancient Buddhist and Hindu monasteries , townships , forts , palaces , temples , mosques , mausoleums , memorials , and other community structures. Uttar Pradesh 's architectural structures also include various Hindu temples , Ghats , etc. largely found in ancient cities like Benares (Varanasi), Brindaban (Vrindavan), Mathura , and Prayagraj (Allahabad).

Most of the ancient buildings and structures at Sarnath were damaged or destroyed. However, amongst the ruins can be distinguished:

For Buddhists, Sarnath (or Isipatana) is one of four pilgrimage sites designated by Gautama Buddha , the other three being Kushinagar , Bodh Gaya , and Lumina.

Famous temples are the Dashavatara Temple in Deograh , Kashi Vishwanath Temple in Varanasi and Krishnajanmabhoomi in Mathura.

Atala Masjid of Jaunpur shows some influences from Hindu architecture.

Uttar Pradesh has three World Heritage Sites : Taj Mahal , Agra Fort and the nearby Fatehpur Sikri . Allahabad Fort stands on the banks of the Yamuna near the confluence with the river Ganges. It is the largest fort built by Akbar.

The Taj Mahal in Agra , built between 1632 and 1643 during the reign of Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan is considered to be one of the best examples of Mughal architecture, as well as Indo-Islamic architecture as a whole. While earlier Mughal buildings were primarily constructed of red sandstone , Shah Jahan promoted the use of white marble inlaid with semi-precious stones . Buildings under his patronage reached new levels of refinement. It is surrounded by vast gardens on all four sides .

Lucknow, the capital of the state, has several beautiful historical monuments such as Bara Imambara and Chhota Imambara . It has also preserved the damaged complex of the Oudh-period British Resident 's quarters, which are being restored.

The Allahabad Public Library built in the Scottish Baronial style, and All Saints Cathedral, Allahabad and Kanpur Memorial Church built in the gothic revival style are examples of European-styled buildings in Uttar Pradesh.

The Lucknow Charbagh railway station and Kanpur Central railway station were built in the Indo-Saracenic style .

NOIDA is a planned city and IT hub.