Arnold "Arnie" Gundersen (born January 4, 1949, in Elizabeth, New Jersey ) is a former nuclear industry executive, and engineer with more than 44 years of nuclear industry experience who became a whistleblower in 1990. Gundersen has written dozens of expert reports for nongovernment organizations and the state of Vermont. Gunderson was a licensed reactor operator from 1971-1972 on Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 's  zero-power open-pool university  research reactor at the Reactor Critical Facility in Schenectady, New York , where he was a nuclear engineering graduate student.

Gundersen questioned the safety of the Westinghouse AP1000 , a proposed third-generation nuclear reactor and has expressed concerns about the operation of the Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant . He served as an expert witness in the investigation of the Three Mile Island accident and has provided commentary on the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster .

Gundersen is a graduate of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (1971), with a B.S. cum laude and a GPA of 3.74 in nuclear engineering, holds a master's degree in nuclear engineering, and gained an Atomic Energy Commission Fellowship (1972).  Gundersen has more than 40 years of nuclear power engineering experience. Gundersen holds a nuclear safety patent, was a licensed reactor operator, and is a former nuclear industry senior vice president. During his nuclear power industry career, Gundersen also managed and coordinated projects at 70 nuclear power plants in the US.

From 1972 to 1976 Gundersen worked at the Northeast Utilities Service Corporation as a nuclear engineer; and from 1976 to 1979 at New York State Electric & Gas as an engineering supervisor. From 1979 to 1990 Gundersen was employed at Nuclear Energy Services , a Danbury, Connecticut -based consulting firm. Gundersen served as an expert witness in the investigation of the 1979 Three Mile Island accident . He co-authored the DOE Decommissioning Handbook , First Edition (1981–82).

In 1990 Gundersen was a senior vice president at Nuclear Energy Services when he discovered radioactive material in an accounting safe. Three weeks after notifying the company president of what he believed to be radiation safety violations, Gundersen was fired. According to The New York Times , for three years, Gundersen was "awakened by harassing phone calls in the middle of the night" and "became concerned about his family's safety". Gundersen believes he was blacklisted, harassed and fired for doing what he thought was right.

While also writing numerous nuclear expert reports from 1993 to 2008, Gundersen was employed at a number of Connecticut schools teaching mathematics and physics; in 2007 he became Mathematics Professor at Community College of Vermont .

Gundersen is chief engineer of Fairewinds Associates, and on the board of directors for Fairewinds Energy Education a 501c3 non-profit organization.

“The Lessons of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Accident”, International Symposium on the Truth of Fukushima Nuclear Accident and the Myth of Nuclear Safety, Iwanami Shoten Publishers, University of Tokyo, Japan, August 30, 2012.

“The Echo Chamber: Regulatory Capture and the Fukushima Daiichi Disaster”, Lessons From Fukushima, February 27, 2012, Greenpeace International.

Co-author of Fukushima Daiichi: Truth And The Way Forward, Shueisha Publishing, February 17, 2012, Tokyo, Japan.

Invited chapter author for the DOE Decommissioning Handbook, First Edition, 1981-1982.

Energy Absorbing Turbine Missile Shield – U.S. Patent # 4,397,608 ¬– September 8, 1983

In April 2010, Gundersen released a report (commissioned by several nongovernment organizations ) which explored a hazard associated with the possible rusting through of the AP1000 containment structure steel liner. In the AP1000 design, the liner and the concrete are separated, and if the steel rusts through, "there is no backup containment behind it" says Gundersen. If the dome rusted through the design would expel radioactive contaminants and the plant "could deliver a dose of radiation to the public that is 10 times higher than the N.R.C. limit" according to Gundersen. Westinghouse has disputed Gundersen’s assessment. Gundersen has testified  before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission ’s Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards saying that "if a hole appeared, the chimney effect would disperse radioactive material far and wide".

In 2010 Gundersen expressed concerns about the operation of the Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant , saying a leak of radioactive tritium there could be "followed by releases of other, more dangerous materials if the plant keeps operating". The plant ceased operations in 2014 and is currently in the process of nuclear decommissioning .

Gundersen has said that the U.S. nuclear industry and regulators need to reexamine disaster planning and worst-case scenarios, especially in reactors such as Vermont Yankee, which have the same design as the crippled nuclear plant at the center of the 2011 Japanese Fukushima nuclear emergency . He has stated that Vermont Yankee and similar plants are vulnerable to a similar cascade of events as in Japan.

As part of Fairewinds Energy Education, Gundersen has hosted numerous videos and provided updates about the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. He was also a regular guest on media outlets such as Democracy Now and CNN discussing the issue. In an interview with Al Jazeera , Gundersen referred to Fukushima as "the biggest industrial catastrophe in the history of mankind".

In September 2013 Gundersen accused the Japanese government of lying in order to secure its position as host of the 2020 Olympic Games when it claimed that the disaster was under control and that there existed no health concerns. The plant, Gundersen said, "is leaking into the Pacific Ocean extensively" and that thyroid cancers, deformed fish and radioactive animals were being discovered.

In early October 2013, Gundersen stated that due to newly discovered leaks and impending tropical storms, the potential existed for a release of radiation 15,000 times that of Hiroshima .

A weeklong series in the December 1992 Cleveland Plain Dealer entitled "Lethal Doses: Radiation That Kills" alleged "extreme medical malpractice" in radiation medicine and accused the Nuclear Regulatory Commission of "serial failings to do anything about it". Runner-up for the Pulitzer Prize in 1993, the Plain Dealer’s five-part series  alleged numerous of "misappropriation and sloppiness using nuclear material that led to disfigurement and death". One of the five parts cited Arnie Gundersen who alleged "botched inspections and cozy personal relationships between NRC inspectors and licensees". Two congressional investigations were held in response to this series in order to obtain NRC reform on the matter.

Partial transcript from Federal regulation of medical radiation uses: Hearing before the U. S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, , May 6, 1993, page 22: