A Bachelor of Technology ( Latin Baccalaureus Technologiae ; B.Tech. ) is an undergraduate academic degree in the field of engineering and technology conferred after the completion of a four-to-five-year program of studies at an accredited university or accredited higher education institution, such as a college or university in India and other countries. In India, this is a four-year undergraduate degree awarded by few universities and colleges which is equivalent to four-year Bachelor of Engineering with Honours .

Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) degree in India is an undergraduate academic degree conferred after the completion of a four-year full-time engineering program from All India Council for Technical Education recognised institute. The B.Tech. degree is generally awarded by Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) , National Institutes of Technology (NITs) (India) , Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) , Government Funded Technical Institutes (GFTIs) or other Centrally Funded Technical Institutes (CFTIs) and private deemed universities in various engineering disciplines such as Civil Engineering , Chemical Engineering , Mechanical Engineering , Electrical Engineering , Computer Science and Engineering , Electronics and Communication Engineering , Cyber Security and many more. This degree is generally equivalent to a Bachelor of Engineering offered in other Affiliated Engineering colleges of State Collegiate universities or a Bachelor of Science in Engineering or Bachelor of Engineering in the United States and Europe.

Eligibility for a B.Tech. program in India typically requires candidates to have completed their higher secondary education (10+2) with mandatory subjects such as mathematics, physics, chemistry or other technical subjects. Institutions often set a minimum aggregate percentage requirement, usually 75% and the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) Main is a prominent entrance exam for B.Tech. admissions, comprising questions in Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry. JEE Advanced is the subsequent exam for those trying to enter the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs). Admission to National Institutes of Technology (NITs) , Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs) , MIT Vishwaprayag University, Solapur other Government Funded Technical Institutes (GFTIs) and deemed universities like Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham , International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad are based on JEE Main scores.

In Australia , the Bachelor of Technology (BTech) degree is offered by RMIT University , Edith Cowan University , Curtin University and certain private institutions.

In Singapore , the degree is offered by National University of Singapore under NUS SCALE programmes.

In New York State, the degree is offered by the New York City College of Technology , part of City University of New York . Multiple academic departments of the college offers course resulting in the degree upon graduation.

The National Technology Council (NTC) of Pakistan is responsible for accrediting 4-year technology degree programs in universities. This ensures quality education that meets international standards.

NTC also maintains a register of technologists with different categories based on qualifications and experience. Graduates with 4-year degrees can register as "Graduate Engineering Technologists" until December 31, 2022. After that, only graduates from NTC-accredited programs will be eligible. Those with 5 years of experience can register as "Professional Engineering Technologist".