The Boeing MQ-28 Ghost Bat , previously known as the Boeing Airpower Teaming System ( ATS ), is a stealth , multirole , unmanned combat aerial vehicle developed by Boeing Australia for the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). It is designed as a force multiplier aircraft capable of flying alongside crewed aircraft for support as part of an integrated system ( loyal wingman ) including space-based capabilities, and performing autonomous missions independently using artificial intelligence .

The aircraft is the first combat aircraft designed and developed in Australia in over half a century. In February 2019, Boeing said that it will "depend on the market" whether the aircraft is manufactured in Australia or the US. Ghost Bat will remain a sovereign Australian program, with aircraft only being produced in Australia and the lead partner on the program being the RAAF. On 4 November 2021, Boeing Australia announced the Melbourne facility, Boeing Aerostructures Australia , had already commenced construction of its fifth aircraft. On 26 March 2024, Boeing Australia announced construction had started on a 9000 square-meter 'Wellcamp Aerospace and Defence Precinct' facility in Toowoomba in partnership with the Wagner Corporation . While earthworks begin, Wagner Corporation is continuing to work with Boeing Australia to finalise the production facility design and architectural features. This facility had initially been announced on 21 September 2021 by the Queensland Premier to support construction of the Ghost Bat.

In the official naming ceremony held at RAAF Base Amberley on 21 March 2022, it was announced the Loyal Wingman will be known as the MQ-28A Ghost Bat in RAAF service, named after an Australian bat found in northern parts of the Australian continent. The ghost bat is an Australian native mammal known for teaming together in a pack to detect and hunt, which reflects the unique characteristics of the aircraft's sensors and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance abilities.

The RAAF initially planned to buy three Airpower Teaming System (ATS) systems, as part of the Loyal Wingman Advanced Development Program (LWADP). These three drones were built at an automated production line in Melbourne , Victoria. The order was increased to six with an A$115 million contract days after the first flight. As of 9 May 2023, the Australian government confirmed its commitment to funding 10 aircraft for the RAAF, not including three prototypes that will not be owned by the government or operated by the RAAF. This takes the government's total investment in the Loyal Wingman program to over A$600 million. The uncrewed platforms are scheduled to enter service with the RAAF in 2024-25.

In February 2024, the Australian Government announced a further A$400 million in funding for three more aircraft, built to the new "Block 2" standard. The announced improvements included developments to the sensors, mission payloads, integrated combat system and the autonomous systems.

After a full-scale mock-up was revealed at the 2019 Avalon Airshow, the first prototype aircraft achieved a power-on of its systems in March 2020, and was rolled out in May 2020 by Boeing Australia with the release of images showing a detailed prototype of the aircraft and a video to illustrate the drone's operational abilities. In May 2022, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison reflected "This is a truly historic moment for our country and for Australian defence innovation. The Loyal Wingman will be pivotal to exploring the critical capabilities our Air Force needs to protect our nation and its allies into the future."

Boeing announced it powered up the engine of its first Airpower Teaming System (ATS) uncrewed aircraft for the first time in September 2020. The engine test was part of ground testing to prepare for its first flight before the end of 2020.

The Boeing Airpower Teaming System (ATS) prototype moved under its own power for the first time in October 2020, conducting low-speed taxi tests at RAAF Base Amberley . The Boeing Airpower Teaming System later performed a high-speed taxi test at an unnamed remote location in December 2020.

The first test flight of the prototype occurred at RAAF Base Woomera on 27 February 2021. Two more test flights occurred at RAAF Woomera Range Complex in early November 2021 where a prototype successfully raised and engaged its landing gear while a second prototype completed its first test flight.

In August 2022, it was revealed by United States Secretary of the Air Force Frank Kendall that preliminary discussions were being held about purchasing the MQ-28 for US service. The 2023 Defence budget revealed that a Combat Collaborative Aircraft Project Arrangement for greater collaboration on the MQ-28 had been signed with the US in line with the recommendations made in the Defence Strategic Review.

In July 2024, after a visit to the Ghost Bat facility in Melbourne, the Australian Assistant Minister for Defence clarified that there is an option to arm the UAV in the future in addition to its reconnaissance and surveillance roles.

On 13 June 2024, the first Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) remote systems pilot Wing commander Parsons completed Boeing's training, becoming the first non-Boeing pilot on the program. During a typical mission, a launch and recovery operator would oversee the aircraft as it takes flight, then it would be handed off to a crewed aircraft, such as an E-7A, F-35A or F/A-18F, whose crew tasks it to perform, for example, an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance mission.

The Ghost Bat is an uncrewed aerial vehicle incorporating artificial intelligence and utilising a modular mission package system in the nose of the aircraft. The entire nose section can be removed and quickly swapped for another with a different payload for various missions including combat, force reconnaissance, and electronic warfare. Developed under Air Force Minor Program DEF 6014, one role will be to use the Manned-Unmanned Teaming (MUM-T) concept to support and protect manned Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) aircraft, such as the F-35A , F/A-18F , E-7A , and KC-30A while they conduct operations.

The UAV is designed to act as a "loyal wingman" that is controlled by a parent aircraft to accomplish tasks such as scouting or absorbing enemy fire if attacked, as well as operating independently. It has a range of more than 2,000 nautical miles (3,700 km; 2,300 mi). The UAV's jet engine allows it to fly in the high subsonic flight regime and keep up with manned fighters. Boeing has said it has 'fighter-like' maneuverability. The MQ-28A prototype did not use any radiation-absorbent material (RAM) coating and instead relied on its shape to reduce its radar cross section (RCS). The aircraft wing is Boeing's largest resin-infused single composite component, leveraging proven technology from the trailing edges of Boeing 787 wings trailing edge. Three key manufacturing innovations were incorporated in the areas of robotic drill and fill, shimless assembly, and full-size determinant assembly.

Data from Air International

General characteristics

Performance