Certified engineering technologist (CET) is a Canadian professional certification awarded on the basis of academic qualification and work experience.  Abbreviated as C.E.T., most Canadian provincial engineering and applied science technology associations offer this certification. Certification is voluntary and does not represent a provincial regulatory requirement or a statutory required license.

The ASET website defines a certified engineering technologist as

"A professional, who through academic training and experience in the application of engineering or scientific principles, is capable of assuming responsibility and exercising independent judgement in the practice of engineering or applied science technology.

Carries out a wide range of complex work, either independently or under general direction.

Typical activities include design, production, marketing, testing, quality control, estimating, surveying, inspection, diagnostic evaluation, supervision, management, technical sales and teaching. Such activities may be carried out in association with other professionals.

Uses an applied approach based on a comprehensive understanding of a specific technology.

Evaluates assignments, determines procedures and implements solutions, schedules work to meet objectives, participates in short- and long-range planning, and may become involved in developing and promoting conceptual change.

May assume managerial or administrative responsibility for a wide range of technical endeavours.

May supervise and coordinate a diverse working group and train less experienced technical and professional staff."

Each province's certifying body is responsible for determining the standards by which Engineering Technologists are certified. However, most jurisdictions do have some commonalities:

Certified engineering technologist (abbreviated "C.E.T."), registered engineering technologist (abbreviated "R.E.T."), and applied science technologist " (abbreviated "A.Sc.T.") are voluntary certifications and are not a provincial regulatory requirement or a statutory required license, there is no legal requirement for membership. Certification is managed individually by each province. In Alberta, professional technologists abbreviated "P.Tech" are required to have a limited license to practice professional engineering within a defined scope.

Certification is protected and managed by provincial law.

Certification is managed by New Brunswick Society of Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics.

The society is mandated and empowered by the Engineering Technology Act of New Brunswick.

Certification is managed by a council of The Society of Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists of Nova Scotia , also called "TechNova Certified Technology Professionals". Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics.

The society is mandated and empowered by the Applied Science Technology Act of Nova Scotia.

Certification is managed by Island Technology Professionals . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics.

The association is mandated and empowered by the Applied Science and Engineering Technicians and Technologists Act

Certification is managed by the Association of Engineering Technicians and Technologists of Newfoundland and Labrador . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics.

There doesn't appear to be a specific applied science technology act or engineering technology act in Newfoundland.

Certification in Quebec is called "Professional Technologist", or "technologue professionel" status. Unlike Alberta's Professional Technologist (Engineering) designation, which is a limited license to practice professional engineering within a limited scope, Quebec's Professional Technologist designation is equivalent to a CET designation and thus is not a license to practice professional engineering.

Certification is managed by the Ordre des Technologues Professionnels du Quebec .

Members are governed by the "Code des professions du Québec" and the "Code de déontologie des technologues professionnels", and perform according to accepted norms and standards in the industry.

Certification is managed by the Ontario Association of Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics and rules of professional conduct.

The association is mandated and empowered by the Ontario Association of Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists Act of Ontario.

Certification is managed by the Certified Technicians and Technologists Association of Manitoba . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics and rules of professional conduct.

The association is mandated and empowered by the Certified Applied Science Technologists Act of Manitoba.

Certification in Saskatchewan is called "Applied Science Technologist", abbreviated "A.Sc.T."

Certification is managed by the Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists & Technicians . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics and rules of professional conduct.

The association is mandated and empowered by the Technologists and Technicians act of Saskatchewan.

Certification is managed by the Association of Science and Engineering Technology Professionals of Alberta . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics and rules of professional conduct, as well as a set of bylaws. and regulations.

In addition to certification, ASET is able to provide a "Professional Technologist" designation, which makes that person eligible to practice engineering within a scope of practice specified by a board of examiners.

Unlike other provinces, Alberta authorizes the creation of ASET and the regulation of the title of Engineering Technologist in their Engineering and Geoscience Professions act.

Certification in British Columbia is called "applied science technologist", abbreviated "A.Sc.T." and is closely related to a certified engineering technician , abbreviated "C.Tech"

Certification is managed by The Applied Science Technologists and Technicians of British Columbia . Certified professionals are bound by a specific code of ethics and rules of professional conduct. Technologists and technicians contribute to the overall engineering team in different functional capacities. Technicians frequently support engineers or technologists ; providing design input via feedback loop when troubleshooting operational equipment.

The organization registers Applied Science Technologists (A.Sc.T.) and Certified Technicians (C.Tech) in the engineering disciplines and professional recognition and definitions is governed by Bill 49 – 2018: Professional Governance Act in British Columbia. Each engineering team member has a professional seal and qualifies for independent professional liability insurance within their practice.

Nunavut has no professional association for the occupation of engineering technologist.

As well, they do not appear to have an act regarding the profession of engineering technology.

The Yukon Territory is offers residents certification by the Applied Science Technologists & Technicians of BC for the occupation of applied science and engineering technologist.

The Northwest territory does not appear to have a professional association for the occupation of engineering technologist.

As well, they do not appear to have an act regarding the profession of engineering technology.

Engineering technologist in the Northwest Territories are regulated by the Alberta association.

Certification is a provincial jurisdiction, so the rights and responsibilities of certified engineering technologists can vary.

In every province, certified engineering technologists are required to follow the professional code of ethics laid out by the certifying body.

The code of ethics can vary from province to province, but the following is representative of what is contained in many province's code of ethics:

Failure to follow the code of ethics can result in loss of certification, as well as fines from the certifying body.

In all provinces and territories, it is unlawful to practice Professional engineering and hold yourself as a Professional Engineer without a license to practice. However, some provinces provide exemptions allowing certified engineering technologists to practice under certain circumstances.

In Canada, The title of C.E.T., which is used as a post-nominal , is generally protected by provincial legislation.  One cannot use the title or hold that one is a certified engineering technologist unless so certified, by a provincial body associated with the Canadian Council of Technicians and Technologists , unless stipulated otherwise by provincial legislation.

In some provinces this title may be replaced with applied science technologist (AScT), registered engineering technologist (RET), or more recently professional technologist (P.Tech) to more closely align with professional engineers who use the title (P.Eng).

The 1995 agreement on internal trade (amended since), agreed upon by all provinces except Nunavut, lays out the general principles of transferability of professional certifications between provinces. Specifically, chapter 7 spells out the principles of professional certification.

Internationally, transferability of this title by members of Canadian Council of Technicians and Technologists affiliated associations is governed by the Sydney Accord .

Unlike the Red Seal Journeyman certification , which is automatically and freely recognized in all provinces and territories, Membership in one provincial organization does not automatically and freely provide the ability to use the C.E.T. designation in all provinces. For example, in the province of Ontario, being a member of the Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists Association of Manitoba does not provide the ability to use the C.E.T. title in Ontario. The options available are to either transfer their membership to the Ontario Association of Certified Engineering Technicians and Technologists , or to maintain a membership in both provinces.

Alberta and British Columbia have the Trade, Investment, and Labour Mobility Agreement, which allows professionals and tradesmen certified in one province to use their title in the other province.