Charles Frederick Holder (1851–1915) was an American naturalist, conservationist, and writer who produced over 40 books and thousands of articles. Known as a pioneer of big-game fishing , he founded and led the Tuna Club of Avalon , credited as the first game fishing organization. He was socially active in Pasadena, California , where he was a trustee of Throop College and co-founder of the Tournament of Roses .

Holder came from a wealthy Massachusetts Quaker family. His father was the zoologist Joseph Bassett Holder (1824–1888) and his mother Emoia Violet Jones. He attended the Friends' school in Providence, Rhode Island, and Allen's preparatory school at West Newton, Massachusetts, as well as from private tutors. In 1869, he attended the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis but he did not continue in the Navy after graduation.

After working as a curator at New York's American Museum of Natural History , he moved to Pasadena, California in 1885. A passionate naturalist throughout his life, he was known for his books on marine zoology and the first books on big-game fishing, a sport Holder pioneered in 1869. His books are noted for their combination of accurate scientific detail with exciting narratives.

From 1890 to 1892, Holder was a President of the Tournament of Roses Association , and for 1910 he was named the tournament grand marshal . He became known in Pasadena as a businessman, philanthropist, and conservationist/sportsman. In 1898, he founded the Tuna Club of Avalon on Santa Catalina Island , as an international organization that called for proper management of all game fish.

In 1910, he traveled with Frederick Russell Burnham to Mexico and uncovered Mayan artifacts, including the Esperanza Stone , a supposedly paranormal relic described in The Book of the Damned .

Holder died in Pasadena as a result of an automobile accident caused by him being under illegal substances and is buried in Mountain View Cemetery in Altadena, California .

In 1998, he was inducted in the International Game Fish Association Hall of Fame.