This is a comparison of both historical and current web browsers based on developer, engine, platform(s), releases, license, and cost.

Basic general information about the browsers. Browsers listed on a light purple background are discontinued. Platforms with a yellow background have limited support.

Browsers are compiled to run on certain operating systems , without emulation .

This list is not exhaustive, but rather reflects the most common OSes today (e.g. Netscape Navigator was also developed for OS/2 at a time when macOS 10 did not exist) but does not include the growing appliance segment (for example, the Opera web browser has gained a leading role for use in mobile phones, smartphones, the Nintendo DS and Wii, and Personal Digital Assistants, and is also used in some smart TVs).
Both the web browser and OS means most recent version, example: Windows 11 with Internet Explorer 11.

Information about what common browser features are implemented natively (without third-party add-ons).

Information about what common accessibility features are implemented natively (without third-party add-ons). Browsers that do not support pop-ups have no need for pop-up blocking abilities, so that field is marked as N/A.

Information about what common accessibility features are implemented natively (without third-party add-ons).

Information about what web standards, and technologies the browsers support, except for JavaScript. External links lead to information about support in future versions of the browsers or extensions that provide such functionality.

Information about what web standards, and technologies the browsers support. External links lead to information about support in future versions of the browsers or extensions that provide such functionality.

Information about what JavaScript technologies the browsers support. Note that although XPath is used by XSLT , it is only considered here if it can be accessed using JavaScript. External links lead to information about support in future versions of the browsers or extensions that provide such functionality, e.g., Babel .

See what parts of DOM your browser supports

Information about what Internet protocols the browsers support (in addition to HTTP that all (modern) browser should and do fully support ). External links lead to information about support in future versions of the browsers or extensions that provide such functionality.

More than half of web traffic from Chrome to Google's servers is handled by QUIC protocol, not TCP (or HTTP/1). Chrome, Opera, and Firefox have support for QUIC, and HTTP/3 , while Safari is testing it for a subset of users.

Information about what image formats the browsers support. External links lead to information about support in future versions of the browsers or extensions that provide such functionality.

Most browsers are available in more than one language.