Christophe de Dinechin is a French computer scientist , with contributions in video games , programming languages and operating systems .

Dinechin contributed to C++ , notably a high-performance exception handling implementation that became a de-facto standard in the industry. de Dinechin was one of the proponents of a portable C++ ABI , initially developed for Itanium , but now widely used across platforms.

Dinechin is the designer of the XL programming language and associated concept programming methodology. "XL" is named for "eXtensible Language".

XL features programmer-reconfigurable syntax and semantics . Compiler plug-ins can be used to add new features to the language. A base set of plug-ins implements a relatively standard imperative language . Programmers can write their own plug-ins to implement application-specific notations, such as symbolic differentiation , which can then be used as readily as built-in language features.

There are projects that exploit similar ideas to create code with higher level of abstraction. Among them are:

As initial developer of Alpha Waves , a "groundbreaking" Atari ST game (listed in the Guinness World Records as the first 3D platform game ), de Dinechin heavily influenced Frederick Raynal , the main developer of Alone in the Dark . de Dinechin also wrote a few viral games for HP-48 calculators, and was the first person to take advantage of hardware-scrolling on these machines.

In the early 2000s, he worked as a software architect for HP-UX , and was the initial designer of HP's virtualisation platform for Itanium servers, HP Integrity Virtual Machines . He was awarded 10 US patents for this work.

Since 2022, he also is the initiator and maintainer of DB48X , a new implementation of RPL .

Christophe de Dinechin did the initial port of Emacs to the Aqua user interface. He wrote a variety of open-source drivers for the HP DE200C Digital Entertainment Center, turning it from a web-connected CD Player into a true digital video recorder.

Between 2010 and 2017, Christophe de Dinechin was the CEO of Taodyne, a company developing a 3D animation tool, using a derivative of his XL programming language called Tao3D to describe dynamic documents.

Dinechin has published three books: