CSI: NY ( Crime Scene Investigation: New York , stylized as CSI: NY/ Crime Scene Investigation ) is an American police procedural television series that ran on CBS from September 22, 2004, to February 22, 2013, for a total of nine seasons and 197 original episodes. The show follows the investigative team of NYPD forensic scientists and police officers identified as "Crime Scene Investigators" (instead of the actual title of " Crime Scene Unit Forensic Technicians " (CSU)) as they unveil the circumstances behind mysterious and unusual deaths, as well as other crimes. The series is an indirect spin-off from the veteran series CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and a direct spin-off from CSI: Miami , during an episode in which several of the CSI: NY characters made their first appearances. It is the third series in the CSI franchise .

Originally in 2004, CSI: NY was produced in partnership with the Canadian media company Alliance Atlantis . The company dissolved after season three in 2007, and all production after that was done under the purview of CBS Paramount Television.

The series was filmed at the CBS Studio Center , with many of the outside scenes shot in and around Los Angeles. Occasionally, scenes were filmed on location in New York City.

The series aired its final episode on February 22, 2013. On May 10, 2013, CBS canceled the series after nine seasons.

CSI: NY follows a group of crime scene investigators (CSI's for short) who work for the New York Police Department 's (NYPD for short) crime lab . The series mixes gritty subject matter and deduction in the same manner as its predecessors, yet also places a great deal of emphasis on criminal profiling . The team is led by Detective Mac Taylor, a former Marine from Chicago . Mac, a veteran of the NYPD, lost his wife on 9/11 , and as such must work to rebuild his personal life while supervising his team. He is organized, efficient, dedicated, and very proper in his management style. Mac's partner is originally Detective Stella Bonasera. Stella is half-Greek , half-Italian . She helped Mac through the impact of his wife's death and has been by his side ever since. She is a savvy investigator, yet she often speaks before she thinks. Stella leaves New York to head a crime lab in New Orleans and is replaced by Detective Jo Danville. Jo is a former FBI criminalist and an experienced psychological profiler. She and Mac quickly form a strong friendship and an even stronger working rapport. Jo is still haunted by her ousting from the FBI after blowing the whistle on improper lab procedure, so she works to regain her professional reputation. Together, Mac, Stella, and Jo head an elite team of detectives including Detectives Danny Messer, Aiden Burn, and Lindsay Monroe. The team also works alongside former medical examiner -turned-CSI Sheldon Hawkes, Detective Don Flack, Medical Examiner Sid Hammerback, and CSI trainee Adam Ross.

The theme song for CSI: NY was taken from the first verse of The Who 's " Baba O'Riley ." For season four (and onward), the theme was revamped to be more instrumental, removing the lyrics: "I don't need to fight to prove I'm right. I don't need to be forgiven." The score composer for the series was Bill Brown , who won a BMI Award for season one.

Like CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and CSI: Miami , CSI: NY has a comic book , novels , and a video game based on the show.

Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of CSI: NY on CBS :

Note: Each U.S. network television season generally starts in late September and ends in late May, which coincides with the completion of May Sweeps .

All episodes are available to stream on Paramount+.