Develop: The Apple Technical Journal was a quarterly magazine published by Apple for a total of twenty-nine issues between 1990 and 1997. The hardcover journal consisted of highly technical information written primarily by Apple engineers for Apple developers . As a result of Apple's acquisition of NeXT Computer and subsequent return of Steve Jobs in 1997, Develops' production was terminated within Apple. This action was done to return Apple to a state of profitability. Develop: The Apple Technical Journal lives on in a digital format as a guest column within MacTech to this day.

Develop was written by Apple engineers for Apple developers and could almost be described as a textbook rather than a magazine. Every issue is packed full of detailed information regarding software and hardware tools relevant at the time of publishing, along with pages upon pages of example code. Most issues contained over one hundred pages of text, pictures, and diagrams, and each issue contained over ten articles and columns. These entries include a common theme of hardware and software troubleshooting , tips and tricks for all aspects of coding, tutorials for new software, and countless other computer-related instructions.

Apple Develop had twenty-nine quarterly issues between 1990 and 1997. It was one of many products Apple created in the absence of their co-founder, Steve Jobs , between 1985 and 1997. The products that this Cupertino , California-based technology giant released during that period of time had varying levels of success, leaving Apple in financially rocky territory. These products included the Apple Newton , Apple Pippin , Apple QuickTake , and, of course, Apple Develop . In 1997, Steve Jobs returned to Apple after Apple acquired his company, NeXT Computers, for its valuable resources. He took on the role of CEO and began making significant changes. These included the closure of many departments and the cancelation of several hardware and software products. Develop was one of the products affected by the massive restructuring of Apple that took place in 1997. The cancelation of Develop was likely done to assist in returning Apple to a state of profitability and focus its resources on quality over quantity of products. The magazine is now accessible through a few digital sources. They include vintageapple.org and mactech.com, which are both accessible through the external links section.