Energy policies are the government's strategies and decisions regarding the production , distribution , and consumption of energy within a specific jurisdiction . Energy is essential for the functioning of modern economies because they require energy for many sectors, such as industry, transport, agriculture, housing. The main components of energy policy include legislation , international treaties, energy subsidies and other public policy techniques.

The energy sector emits more greenhouse gas worldwide than any other sector. Therefore, energy policies are closely related to climate change mitigation policies. These decisions affect how high the greenhouse gas emissions by that country are.

Access to energy is critical for basic social needs, such as lighting, heating, cooking, and healthcare. Given the importance of energy, the price of energy has a direct effect on jobs, economic productivity, business competitiveness, and the cost of goods and services.

Frequently the dominant issue of energy policy is the risk of supply-demand mismatch (see: energy crisis ). Current energy policies also address environmental issues (see: climate change ), particularly challenging because of the need to reconcile global objectives and international rules with domestic needs and laws.

The "human dimensions" of energy use are of increasing interest to business , utilities, and policymakers. Using the social sciences to gain insights into energy consumer behavior can help policymakers to make better decisions about broad-based climate and energy options. This could facilitate more efficient energy use , renewable-energy commercialization , and carbon-emission reductions.

The attributes of energy policy may include legislation , international treaties, incentives to investment, guidelines for energy conservation , taxation and other public policy techniques. Economic and energy modelling can be used by governmental or inter-governmental bodies as an advisory and analysis tool.

Energy planning is more detailed than energy policy.

Some governments state an explicit energy policy. Others do not but in any case, each government practices some type of energy policy. A national energy policy comprises a set of measures involving that country's laws, treaties and agency directives.

There are a number of elements that are contained in a national energy policy. Some important elements intrinsic to an energy policy include:

Energy policy sometimes dominates and sometimes is dominated by other government policies. For example energy policy may dominate, supplying free coal to poor families and schools thus supporting social policy , but thus causing air pollution and so impeding heath policy and environmental policy . On the other hand energy policy may be dominated by defense policy , for example some counties started building expensive nuclear power plants to supply material for bombs. Or defense policy may be dominated for a while, eventually resulting in stranded assets , such as Nord Stream 2 .

Energy policy is closely related to climate change policy because totalled worldwide the energy sector emits more greenhouse gas than other sectors.

Energy policy decisions are sometimes not taken democratically.

In 2019, some companies “have committed to set climate targets across their operations and value chains aligned with limiting global temperature rise to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and reaching net-zero emissions by no later than 2050”. Corporate power purchase agreements can kickstart renewable energy projects, but the energy policies of some countries do not allow or discourage them.

Nuclear energy policy is a national and international policy concerning some or all aspects of nuclear energy and the nuclear fuel cycle , such as uranium mining , ore concentration, conversion, enrichment for nuclear fuel , generating electricity by nuclear power , storing and reprocessing spent nuclear fuel , and disposal of radioactive waste . Nuclear energy policies often include the regulation of energy use and standards relating to the nuclear fuel cycle . Other measures include efficiency standards, safety regulations, emission standards , fiscal policies , and legislation on energy trading, transport of nuclear waste and contaminated materials, and their storage.  Governments might subsidize nuclear energy and arrange international treaties and trade agreements about the import and export of nuclear technology , electricity , nuclear waste , and uranium .

Since about 2001 the term nuclear renaissance has been used to refer to a possible nuclear power industry revival, but nuclear electricity generation in 2012 was at its lowest level since 1999. Since then it had increased back to 2,653 TWh in 2021, a level last seen in 2006. The share of nuclear power in electricity production however is at a historic low and now below 10% down from a maximum of 17.5% in 1996.

Following the March 2011 Fukushima I nuclear accidents , China, Germany, Switzerland, Israel, Malaysia, Thailand, United Kingdom, and the Philippines are reviewing their nuclear power programs. Indonesia and Vietnam still plan to build nuclear power plants. Thirty-one countries operate nuclear power stations , and there are a considerable number of new reactors being built in China, South Korea, India, and Russia. As of June 2011, countries such as Australia , Austria , Denmark , Greece , Ireland , Latvia, Lichtenstein, Luxembourg , Malta , Portugal , Israel , Malaysia , and Norway have no nuclear power stations and remain opposed to nuclear power.

Public policy has a role to play in renewable energy commercialization because the free market system has some fundamental limitations. As the Stern Review points out: "In a liberalised energy market, investors, operators and consumers should face the full cost of their decisions. But this is not the case in many economies or energy sectors. Many policies distort the market in favour of existing fossil fuel technologies." The International Solar Energy Society has stated that "historical incentives for the conventional energy resources continue even today to bias markets by burying many of the real societal costs of their use".

The energy policy of India is to increase the locally produced energy in India and reduce energy poverty , with more focus on developing alternative sources of energy , particularly nuclear , solar and wind energy. Net energy import dependency was 40.9% in 2021-22. The primary energy consumption in India grew by 13.3% in FY2022-23 and is the third biggest with 6% global share after China and USA. The total primary energy consumption from coal (452.2 Mtoe; 45.88%), crude oil (239.1 Mtoe ; 29.55%), natural gas (49.9 Mtoe; 6.17%), nuclear energy (8.8 Mtoe; 1.09%), hydroelectricity (31.6 Mtoe; 3.91%) and renewable power (27.5 Mtoe; 3.40%) is 809.2 Mtoe (excluding traditional biomass use) in the calendar year 2018. In 2018, India's net imports are nearly 205.3 million tons of crude oil and its products, 26.3 Mtoe of LNG and 141.7 Mtoe coal totaling to 373.3 Mtoe of primary energy which is equal to 46.13% of total primary energy consumption. India is largely dependent on fossil fuel imports to meet its energy demands – by 2030, India's dependence on energy imports is expected to exceed 53% of the country's total energy consumption.

The energy policy of the United Kingdom refers to the United Kingdom's efforts towards reducing energy intensity , reducing energy poverty , and maintaining energy supply reliability. The United Kingdom has had success in this, though energy intensity remains high. There is an ambitious goal to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in future years, but it is unclear whether the programmes in place are sufficient to achieve this objective. Regarding energy self-sufficiency, UK policy does not address this issue, other than to concede historic energy security is currently ceasing to exist (due to the decline of North Sea oil production).

The United Kingdom historically has a good policy record of encouraging public transport links with cities, despite encountering problems with high speed trains, which have the potential to reduce dramatically domestic and short-haul European flights. The policy does not, however, significantly encourage hybrid vehicle use or ethanol fuel use, options which represent viable short term means to moderate rising transport fuel consumption. Regarding renewable energy , the United Kingdom has goals for wind and tidal energy . The 2007 White Paper on Energy set a target that 20% of the UK's energy must come from renewable sources by 2020.

The current energy policy of the United Kingdom is the responsibility of the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero (DESNZ), after the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy was split into the Department for Business and Trade and the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology in 2023. Energy markets are regulated by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem).

The energy policy of the United States is determined by federal, state, and local entities. It addresses issues of energy production, distribution, consumption, and modes of use, such as building codes, mileage standards, and commuting policies. Energy policy may be addressed via legislation , regulation, court decisions, public participation, and other techniques.

Energy policies vary by country, see tables below.