An engineering society is a professional organization for engineers of various disciplines . Some are umbrella type organizations which accept many different disciplines, while others are discipline-specific. Many award professional designations, such as European Engineer , professional engineer , chartered engineer , incorporated engineer or similar. There are also many student-run engineering societies, commonly at universities or technical colleges.

In Canada, the term "engineering society" sometimes refers to organizations of engineering students as opposed to professional societies of engineers. The Canadian Federation of Engineering Students , whose membership consists of most of the engineering student societies from across Canada (see below), is the national association of undergraduate engineering student societies in Canada.

Canada also has many traditions related to the calling of an engineer .

The Engineering Institute of Canada (French: l'Institut Canadien des ingénieurs) has the following member societies:

In the Philippines , the Professional Regulation Commission is a three-man commission attached to the office of the president of the Philippines . Its mandate is to regulate and supervise the practice of professionals (except lawyers ) who constitute the highly skilled manpower of the country. As the agency-in-charge of the professional sector, the PRC plays a strategic role in developing the corps of professionals for industry, commerce, governance and the economy.

In the United Kingdom , the Engineering Council is the regulatory body for the engineering profession. The Engineering Council was incorporated by Royal charter in 1981 and controls the award of chartered engineer , incorporated engineer , engineering technician , and information and communications technology technician titles, through licences issued to thirty six recognised Institutions. There are also 19 professional affiliate institutions, not licensed, but with close associations to the Engineering Council.

The Royal Academy of Engineering is the national academy for engineering.