Feminist HCI is a subfield of human-computer interaction (HCI) that applies feminist theory , critical theory and philosophy to social topics in HCI, including scientific objectivity , ethical values , data collection , data interpretation , reflexivity , and unintended consequences of HCI software. The term was originally used in 2010 by Shaowen Bardzell, and although the concept and original publication are widely cited, as of 2020 Bardzell's proposed frameworks have been rarely used since.

In the early 1980s, there was optimism as to how the field of cognitive psychology could contribute to the development of the field of HCI. As computer systems at the time were widely regarded as difficult to learn and use, mainstream information processing theories and models in psychology were used as a basis from which to develop design principles , methods, analytic tools and prescriptive advice for the design of computer interfaces . This was done generally by three methods: basic research , cognitive modeling and science communication .

One such contribution to the development of HCI in the 90s was by John M. Carroll in 1991, which described in detail how scientific principles were applied to HCI experimental design. Carroll writes that at the time, the 50 year struggle to establish psychology as a science was an important factor in trying to apply the scientific method to HCI studies. Through the 1970s, the typical measures used by empirical studies for HCI were relatively simple; error frequencies and performance times such as by using or testing Fitt's law . However, these scientifically minded studies did not produce insight into improving programming. It was not well understood at the time, how to use structured programming to make higher code quality that is more reliable and maintainable .

The term gender HCI was first described in 2006, and its development is related to feminist HCI. Gender HCI by comparison, examines the functional differences between females and males in using specific computing software such as Excel , whereas feminist HCI applies social principles to the techniques used in HCI design. While it was not disputed there were significant gender gaps in technology participation, there was academic disagreement about the importance or relevance of gender in HCI design in the 2000s. Feminist HCI was also influenced by science and technology studies research.

The term feminist HCI was first used in a 2010 paper by Shaowen Bardzell's article titled Feminist HCI: Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design. It was one of the first papers at the time to propose adoption of feminist theories into HCI research and practice. It was followed up witth a second publication in 2011 detailing the historical interaction between social science and feminism, and how this relates to HCI.

According to a 2020 study of 70 papers using of the term and citing Bardzell's original paper, it was found that Bardzell's proposed frameworks have been widely cited but rarely used and in practice only amount to a superficial engagement with feminist theory.

Bardzell's original theory first examines the history of feminist standpoint theory , science and technology studies , and Bardzell describes how they want the epistemology of HCI to change to better align with feminist standpoint theory. Bardzell considers principles including equity, diversity, social justice , and the already existing theories on gender HCI. This is followed by a literature review of how feminism has been applied to similar fields, including product design , architecture , urban planning and game design . The main proposal of the theory is using six core qualities in HCI design:

Examples of research utilizing feminist HCI include:

For comparison, design theory that does not reference or use the term HCI can also involve feminist perspectives in design, such as: