Fly fishing tackle comprises the fishing tackle or equipment typically used by fly anglers .  Fly fishing tackle includes:

Fly rods normally vary between 2 m (6 ft) and 4 m (13 ft) in length with the most common length sold being 2.74 m (9 ft). Rod lengths are typically given in imperial measurements of feet and inches. Fly rods and lines are designated as to their "weight", typically written as Nwt where 'N' is the number ( e.g. 8wt, 9wt, 10wt).

Rods are matched to the line according to weight. The rod's manufacturer will mark on the rod the fly line weights for which a rod has been designed. One-weight (1wt) rods and lines are the lightest; the weight designations increase in whole number increments as the rod becomes heavier. The heaviest rods and lines readily available currently are 16-weight (16wt). In general, 1wt through 2wt rods would be used for the cast small flies for small trout and panfish; 3wt and 4wt rods are popular for small-stream fishing; 5wt is often considered the all-around rod for trout and general freshwater fishing; 6wt and 7wt rods are used on large rivers and for fishing with streamers, for larger warmwater species, and occasionally in calm inshore conditions for smaller saltwater species; 8wt to 9wt rods and lines might be used for steelhead or salmon in medium rivers, as well as for bass fishing with large flies, fishing for large carp, and general inshore saltwater use; and 10-11wt rods and lines would be used for pursuing large saltwater gamefish (tarpon, snook) under conditions of high wind or surf. The heaviest rods (12–16wt) are mostly used for bluewater species (billfish, tuna) while fishing from a boat. The characteristics of these rods reflect the fact that only short casts are needed during this type of fly fishing, while lifting ability is at a premium.

The species pursued, under which conditions, will largely determine the weight of rod selected. Next, it is important to match the line to the weight of the rod. Using too heavy a line on too light on a rod, or vice versa , will dramatically affect casting performance. It may also permanently warp the rod blank. Generally speaking, you can safely go one line weight more or less (i.e. using an 8wt or 10wt line on a 9wt rod). There are also rods stamped with a range of weights. For example, a rod may be rated 7-8wt. This indicates the rod is designed for either a 7 or 8 weight fly line. There are also some rods rated for wider ranges (e.g. 8-9-10wt). The drawback to multi-rated rods is that compromises in flexibility or action are made in order to accommodate a wider range of line weights. For example, a rod rated for 8-9 weight line will be slightly stiffer than a straight 8wt but slightly softer than a straight 9wt rod. In general, the more expensive the rod, the more likely it'll be designated for a single line weight rather than a range.

Saltwater fly rods are built to handle powerful fish and to cast large, bulky flies over longer distances or into strong winds. Saltwater fly rods are normally fitted with heavier, corrosion-resistant fittings. The reel seat may also be equipped with a short extension often called a "fighting butt". Rods for saltwater fishing fall into the 8 to 15 weight class, with 12-weight being typical for most larger species like tuna, dorado (mahi-mahi) and wahoo (ono).

Note that the line weight generalities described above hold for both single-handed fly rods as well as double-handed fly rods used for Spey Casting , but the length and usage of double-handed rods often varies significantly.

The earliest fly rods were made from greenheart, a tropical wood, and later bamboo originating in the Tonkin area of Guangdong Province in China . The mystical appeal of handmade split-cane rods has endured despite the emergence over the last 50 years of cheaper rod-making materials that offer more durability and performance: fiberglass and carbon fiber .

Split-cane bamboo fly rods combine sport, history and art. It may take well over 100 hours for an experienced rod builder to select and split the raw cane and then to cure, flame, plane, file, taper, glue, wrap and finish each rod.  Quality rods made by famous rod makers may sell for prices well beyond US$ 2,000; a new rod from a competent, contemporary (though not famous) builder may sell for nearly as much.  These rods offer grace, form, and, with their solid mass, surprising strength.  Bamboo rods vary in action from slow to fast depending on the taper of the rod.  In competent hands, they provide the pinnacle in performance.

Today, fly rods are mainly made from carbon fiber / graphite with cork or, less frequently, hypalon being favored for the grip.  Such rods generally offer greater stiffness than bamboo, are much more consistent and less expensive to manufacture, and require less maintenance. Fiberglass was popular for rods constructed in the years following World War II and was the "material of choice" for many years.  However, by the late 1980s, carbon/graphite composite rods (including premium graphite/ boron and graphite/ titanium blends) had emerged as the materials used by most fly rod manufacturers. These premium rods offer a stiffness, sensitivity, and feel unmatched by any other synthetic material. Graphite composites are especially well-suited to the construction of multi-piece rods since the joints, known as ferrules , in better-quality graphite rods do not significantly affect overall flex or rod action.  Today's modern carbon graphite composite fly rods are available in a wide range of sizes and types, from ultralight trout rods to bass fishing rods and two-handed "spey" rods.

Fly line is a specialized fishing line that supplies the weight or mass necessary to cast an artificial fly with a fly rod.  The first fly lines were constructed of woven horsehair that eventually evolved into woven silk fiber lines.  As plastics technologies improved, synthetic materials gradually replaced natural materials in the construction of fly lines.  Today's fly lines are generally constructed of an outside synthetic layer that determines the line's slickness, buoyancy, shape and weight over an inside core material which determines the line's strength and flexibility.  The typical fly line is 90 feet (27 m) long although longer fly lines are manufactured. Fly lines have several characteristics which can be used to describe any given fly line.  Some of these characteristics are based on industry standards and norms while others vary considerably between manufacturers.

Fly line manufacturers design and formulate their fly lines with other characteristics as well.  Some fly lines are specifically formulated for warm water and cold water conditions, fresh and salt water conditions as well as designs that target a specific type or fish or fishing.

Fly line is typically attached to a length of braided or gelspun line wound on the fly reel known as backing.  The length and breaking strength of the backing required depends on the overall line capacity of the reel and the type of fish being sought.  Backing may be as short as a few yards up to hundreds of yards if the reel has the capacity. Backing can serve two purposes.  One is to create a larger diameter spooling surface that allows the fly line to fill the entire fly reel.  The other is to provide additional line for fighting heavy or hard fighting fish.  A fast running or hard fighting fish may take line from the reel and get into the backing.

Terminal fly fishing tackle connects the fly line to the artificial fly.  This is typically a tapered or level ‘’leader’’ with a ‘’tippet’’ section.  Other terminal tackle may include small ‘’strike indicators’’ or weights added to the leader to assist in strike detection and presentation. The leader is a section of fishing line that is attached directly to the end of the fly line.  The ‘’tippet’’ section is a section of fishing line attached to the leader to which the artificial fly is attached.  Leaders and tippets play a key role in the presentations of the fly to the fish and the subsequent landing of a fish when caught.  Leaders and tippets are generally constructed of monofilament or fluorocarbon fishing line.  In some fly fishing situations involving toothy fish, tippets are constructed of braided or single strand stainless steel wire.

The tip of a fly line is usually more than 0.030" thick and the eye of a fly hook
may be less than a tenth that size.   The two must be joined by a "leader," usually 7 to 10 feet long, nowadays of nylon or similar monofilament, either extruded in a continuous taper or made by knotting together several lengths of nylon of diminishing thickness.  These taper from about 0.020" diameter to 0.010" for a large fly or 0.007" for a size 14 trout fly.  The right size and stiffness of nylon also helps the leader "turn over" when cast, so as to present the fly naturally, as if not connected with a fishing rod.  Anglers usually carry spools of extra fine nylon, to replace the tippet or other sections of a leader as required.

Level leaders are a single diameter of line that connects the fly line to the tippet or fly.  Level leaders are typically much shorter than tapered leaders and used with sinking fly lines and heavy flies.  Level leaders when used with sinking lines help get the fly deeper faster.

The tippet connects the leader to the fly.  Tippet sizes were traditionally expressed as X sizes in a scale based on silkworm gut leader material, but nowadays gut has been superseded by a variety of synthetics, mainly monofilaments.  Monofilament is calibrated in thousandths of an inch from 0.020" and larger (used for leader butts or in saltwater fishing) to 0.011" (old size 0X) and as small as 0.003" (8X.)   Fly fishing records are classed by tippet diameter, not breaking strength, which varies between material and manufacturers. Choice of tippet involves a tradeoff: finer tippets are less visible to the fish, resulting in more strikes, but are more easily abraded and broken. Stiffer or softer tippets may be used depending on water temperature, visibility, and need for abrasion resistance. Some toothy species require specially strong and durable tippets so they will not be bitten through, called shock tippets, made of thick monofilament or stainless steel wire.

Accessories include an abundance of different tools and gadgets used by fly anglers to maintain and prepare their tackle, deal with fish being caught and personal clothing and apparel specifically designed for fly fishing comfort and safety.  Accessories include fly boxes designed to store and carry artificial flies.

Fly boxes are designed to store and carry artificial flies in an organized manner.  The typical fly angler carries one or more fly boxes while fly fishing. Fly boxes are available in a wide variety of sizes, styles and configurations.  Fly boxes store flies using a variety of foam, plastic, clip, metal and containing mechanisms. Probably the most famous fly boxes are made in England by Richard Wheatley who have been manufacturing these since 1860 and may be the oldest continuous makers of fly fishing tackle in the world. The firm sold the Companion to Alfred Ronald's Flyfisher's Entomology for decades, a novel fly case developed by Alfred Ronalds in 1844 which included brief instructions on the use of each recommended fly.