Forestry is the science and craft of creating, managing, planting, using, conserving and repairing forests and woodlands for associated resources for human and environmental benefits. Forestry is practiced in plantations and natural stands . The science of forestry has elements that belong to the biological, physical, social, political and managerial sciences. Forest management plays an essential role in the creation and modification of habitats and affects ecosystem services provisioning.

Modern forestry generally embraces a broad range of concerns, in what is known as multiple-use management, including: the provision of timber , fuel wood, wildlife habitat , natural water quality management , recreation , landscape and community protection, employment, aesthetically appealing landscapes , biodiversity management, watershed management , erosion control , and preserving forests as " sinks " for atmospheric carbon dioxide .

Forest ecosystems have come to be seen as the most important component of the biosphere , and forestry has emerged as a vital applied science , craft , and technology . A practitioner of forestry is known as a forester . Another common term is silviculturist. Silviculture is narrower than forestry, being concerned only with forest plants, but is often used synonymously with forestry.

All people depend upon forests and their biodiversity, some more than others. Forestry is an important economic segment in various industrial countries, as forests provide more than 86 million green jobs and support the livelihoods of many more people. For example, in Germany, forests cover nearly a third of the land area, wood is the most important renewable resource , and forestry supports more than a million jobs and about €181 billion of value to the German economy each year.

Worldwide, an estimated 880 million people spend part of their time collecting fuelwood or producing charcoal, many of them women. Human populations tend to be low in areas of low-income countries with high forest cover and high forest biodiversity, but poverty rates in these areas tend to be high. Some 252 million people living in forests and savannahs have incomes of less than US$1.25 per day.

Over the past centuries, forestry was regarded as a separate science. With the rise of ecology and environmental science , there has been a reordering in the applied sciences. In line with this view, forestry is a primary land-use science comparable with agriculture . Under these headings, the fundamentals behind the management of natural forests comes by way of natural ecology. Forests or tree plantations, those whose primary purpose is the extraction of forest products, are planned and managed to utilize a mix of ecological and agroecological principles. In many regions of the world there is considerable conflict between forest practices and other societal priorities such as water quality, watershed preservation, sustainable fishing, conservation, and species preservation.

Silvology ( Latin : silva or sylva , "forests and woods"; Ancient Greek : -λογία , -logia , "science of" or "study of") is the biological science of studying forests and woodlands , incorporating the understanding of natural forest ecosystems , and the effects and development of silvicultural practices. The term complements silviculture , which deals with the art and practice of forest management.

Silvology is seen as a single science for forestry and was first used by Professor Roelof A.A. Oldeman at Wageningen University . It integrates the study of forests and forest ecology, dealing with single tree autecology and natural forest ecology .

Dendrology ( Ancient Greek : δένδρον , dendron , "tree"; and Ancient Greek : -λογία , -logia , science of or study of ) or xylology ( Ancient Greek : ξύλον , ksulon , "wood") is the science and study of woody plants ( trees , shrubs , and lianas ), specifically, their taxonomic classifications. There is no sharp boundary between plant taxonomy and dendrology; woody plants not only belong to many different plant families , but these families may be made up of both woody and non-woody members. Some families include only a few woody species . Dendrology, as a discipline of industrial forestry, tends to focus on identification of economically useful woody plants and their taxonomic interrelationships.  As an academic course of study, dendrology will include all woody plants, native and non-native, that occur in a region.  A related discipline is the study of sylvics, which focuses on the autecology of genera and species.

The provenance of forest reproductive material used to plant forests has a great influence on how the trees develop, hence why it is important to use forest reproductive material of good quality and of high genetic diversity . More generally, all forest management practices, including in natural regeneration systems , may impact the genetic diversity of trees.

The term genetic diversity describes the differences in DNA sequence between individuals as distinct from variation caused by environmental influences. The unique genetic composition of an individual (its genotype ) will determine its performance (its phenotype ) at a particular site.

Genetic diversity is needed to maintain the vitality of forests and to provide resilience to pests and diseases . Genetic diversity also ensures that forest trees can survive, adapt and evolve under changing environmental conditions. Furthermore, genetic diversity is the foundation of biological diversity at species and ecosystem levels. Forest genetic resources are therefore important to consider in forest management.

Genetic diversity in forests is threatened by forest fires , pests and diseases, habitat fragmentation , poor silvicultural practices and inappropriate use of forest reproductive material.

About 98 million hectares of forest were affected by fire in 2015; this was mainly in the tropical domain, where fire burned about 4 percent of the total forest area in that year. More than two-thirds of the total forest area affected was in Africa and South America. Insects, diseases and severe weather events damaged about 40 million hectares of forests in 2015, mainly in the temperate and boreal domains.

Furthermore, the marginal populations of many tree species are facing new threats due to the effects of climate change .

Most countries in Europe have recommendations or guidelines for selecting species and provenances that can be used in a given site or zone.

Forest management is a branch of forestry concerned with overall administrative, legal, economic, and social aspects, as well as scientific and technical aspects, such as silviculture , forest protection , and forest regulation . This includes management for timber, aesthetics , recreation , urban values, water , wildlife , inland and nearshore fisheries, wood products , plant genetic resources , and other forest resource values . Management objectives can be for conservation, utilisation, or a mixture of the two. Techniques include timber extraction, planting and replanting of different species , building and maintenance of roads and pathways through forests, and preventing fire .

The first dedicated forestry school was established by Georg Ludwig Hartig at Hungen in the Wetterau , Hesse , in 1787, though forestry had been taught earlier in central Europe, including at the University of Giessen , in Hesse-Darmstadt .

In Spain, the first forestry school was the Forest Engineering School of Madrid ( Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros de Montes ), founded in 1844.

The first in North America, the Biltmore Forest School was established near Asheville , North Carolina, by Carl A. Schenck on September 1, 1898, on the grounds of George W. Vanderbilt's Biltmore Estate . Another early school was the New York State College of Forestry , established at Cornell University just a few weeks later, in September 1898.

Early 19th century North American foresters went to Germany to study forestry. Some early German foresters also emigrated to North America.

In South America the first forestry school was established in Brazil, in Viçosa , Minas Gerais , in 1962, and moved the next year to become a faculty at the Federal University of Paraná , in Curitiba.

Today, forestry education typically includes training in general biology , ecology , botany , genetics , soil science , climatology , hydrology , economics and forest management . Education in the basics of sociology and political science is often considered an advantage. Professional skills in conflict resolution and communication are also important in training programs.

In India, forestry education is imparted in the agricultural universities and in Forest Research Institutes (deemed universities). Four year degree programmes are conducted in these universities at the undergraduate level. Masters and Doctorate degrees are also available in these universities.

In the United States, postsecondary forestry education leading to a Bachelor's degree or Master's degree is accredited by the Society of American Foresters .

In Canada the Canadian Institute of Forestry awards silver rings to graduates from accredited university BSc programs,  as well as college and technical programs.

In many European countries, training in forestry is made in accordance with requirements of the Bologna Process and the European Higher Education Area .

The International Union of Forest Research Organizations is the only international organization that coordinates forest science efforts worldwide.

In order to keep up with changing demands and environmental factors, forestry education does not stop at graduation. Increasingly, forestry professionals engage in regular training to maintain and improve on their management practices. An increasingly popular tool are marteloscopes ; one hectare large, rectangular forest sites where all trees are numbered, mapped and recorded.

These sites can be used to do virtual thinnings and test one's wood quality and volume estimations as well as tree microhabitats . This system is mainly suitable to regions with small-scale multi-functional forest management systems

Forestry literature is the books, journals and other publications about forestry.

The first major works about forestry in the English language included Roger Taverner 's Booke of Survey (1565), John Manwood 's A Brefe Collection of the Lawes of the Forrest (1592) and John Evelyn 's Sylva (1662).