FreeBASIC is a free and open source multiplatform compiler and programming language based on BASIC licensed under the GNU GPL for Microsoft Windows , protected-mode MS-DOS ( DOS extender ), Linux , FreeBSD and Xbox .  The Xbox version is no longer maintained.

According to its official website, FreeBASIC provides syntax compatibility with programs originally written in Microsoft QuickBASIC (QB).  Unlike QuickBASIC, however, FreeBASIC is a command line only compiler , unless users manually install an external integrated development environment (IDE) of their choice.

On its backend , FreeBASIC makes use of GNU Binutils in order to produce console and graphical user interface applications.  FreeBASIC supports the linking and creation of C static and dynamic libraries and has limited support for C++ libraries.  As a result, code compiled in FreeBASIC can be reused in most native development environments.

While not an optimizing compiler , FreeBASIC can optionally transcompile to C to compile with optimizations. FreeBASIC supports inline assembly , multi-threading , and does not use automatic garbage collection .

C style preprocessing , including multiline macros , conditional compiling and file inclusion, is supported.  The preprocessor also has access to symbol information and compiler settings, such as the language dialect .

Initially, FreeBASIC emulated Microsoft QuickBASIC syntax as closely as possible. Beyond that, the language has continued its evolution. As a result, FreeBASIC combines several language dialects for maximum level of compatibility with QuickBASIC and full access to modern features. New features include support for concepts such as objects , operator overloading , function overloading , namespaces and others.

Newline characters indicate the termination of programming statements. A programming statement can be distributed on multiple consecutive lines by using the underscore line continuation char (_), whereas multiple statements may be written on a single line by separating each statement with a colon (:).

Block comments , as well as end-of-line remarks are supported.  Full line comments are made with an apostrophe ' , while blocks of commented code begin with /' and end with '/ .

FreeBASIC is not case-sensitive.

FreeBASIC provides built-in, QuickBASIC compatible graphics support through FBgfx, which is automatically included into programs that make a call to the SCREEN command.  Its backend defaults to OpenGL on Linux and DirectX on Microsoft Windows .  This abstraction makes FBgfx graphics code cross-platform compatible.  However, FBgfx is not hardware accelerated.

Users familiar with external graphics utilities such as OpenGL or the Windows API can use them without interfering with the built-in graphics library.

As FreeBASIC has evolved, changes have been made that required breaking older-styled syntax.  In order to continue supporting programs written using the older syntax, FreeBASIC now supports the following dialects:

Standard programs, such as the "Hello, World!" program are done just as they were in QuickBASIC.

FreeBASIC adds to this with support for object-oriented features such as methods , constructors , dynamic memory allocation , properties and temporary allocation.

In both cases, the language is well suited for learning purposes.