The Free Software Foundation Europe e.V. ( FSFE ) is an organization that supports free software and all aspects of the free software movement in Europe , with registered chapters in several European countries . It is a registered voluntary association (German: eingetragener Verein ) incorporated under German law .

FSFE was founded in 2001. It is the European sister organization of the US‑based Free Software Foundation (FSF), although each foundation exists as a separate organization. Following the return of Richard Stallman to the FSF in 2021 , the FSFE declared themselves "unable to collaborate" with the FSF.

FSFE believes that access to (and control of) software determines who may participate in a digital society. Consequently, FSFE believes, the freedoms to use, copy, modify and redistribute software, as described in The Free Software Definition , are necessary for equal participation in the Information Age . The focus of FSFE's work is political, legal, and social, with the aim of promoting free software and the ethical, philosophical, social, political and commercial values that it implements. In particular, it:

Projects undertaken by FSFE include:

Each month, FSFE publishes a newsletter, in multiple languages (including English, French , German , Italian , and Spanish ), of their activities that can be mentioned in public.

From FSFE's published "Self-Conception":

The people of the Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE), see ourselves as Europeans from different cultures with the shared goal of co-operation across cultures and of developing a common culture of co-operation from a regional to a global level. We form a non-profit non-governmental organisation and network that itself is part of a global network of people with common goals and visions. We are not representative for anyone but ourselves and our work. Our common work and dedication to freedom in all aspects of digital society is what defines us.

Internally, the FSFE has a consensus-oriented team structure, in which participation is determined by each person's willingness to participate and do work. A democratic and representative-democratic model functions as a fallback when the consensus-based approach accomplishes no results, or when a quick decision is needed.

The FSFE has a modular legal structure with a central "Hub" organization and the possibility of local legal bodies, called "chapters". The Hub is a charitable association ("e.V.") which is registered in Germany .

As well as being in regular contact with the other FSFs — FSF , Free Software Foundation India (FSFI), Free Software Foundation Latin America (FSFLA) — FSFE has a structure of organizations which are official associates. These are mostly national-level free software groups.

In 2010, FSFE received the Theodor Heuss Medal in recognition of its work for freedom in the information society. The medal is awarded once a year in Stuttgart by a non-partisan foundation named after West Germany 's first president.