Presently, in Africa , Google Street View can be seen in parts of Botswana , Uganda , South Africa , Kenya , Eswatini , Lesotho , São Tomé and Príncipe , Senegal , Ghana , Tunisia , Nigeria , Rwanda , the Canary Islands of Spain , and Egypt 's landmarks.

On September 1, 2009, Google announced that it started collecting images in South Africa for Google Maps Street View . Google is currently driving around South Africa in Toyota Priuses, taking photographs of locations in the cities of Johannesburg , Pretoria , Cape Town , Port Elizabeth , Durban and East London . Google Trikes are also being used for the first time to map popular tourist destinations, such as the scenic Chapman's Peak Drive and Table Mountain in Cape Town , Soccer City in Johannesburg , and the new Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban .
Images of South Africa were made available on Google Street View on June 8, 2010.

On December 8, 2010, more locations in South Africa were added. These were mostly rural and main roads, as well as a much larger coverage of the Limpopo province. After the update, the borders of South Africa 's neighboring countries could be reached.

On November 27, 2012, Botswana was added.

On March 18, 2013, Tanzania was added.

On April 23, 2013, Lesotho was added.

On September 20, 2013, Eswatini was added.

On April 21, 2014, more locations in Lesotho and Botswana were added.

On September 9, 2014, landmarks in Egypt were added.

On February 18, 2014, more locations in South Africa were added.

On May 6, 2015, Madagascar was added.

On September 15, 2015, landmarks in Kenya were added.

On October 8, 2015, Uganda was added.

On February 8, 2017, Ghana , Senegal and landmarks in Uganda were added.

On March 18, 2017, Tunisia was added.

On July 27, 2017, Nigeria was added.

On July 25, 2018, landmarks in Nigeria were added.

On October 4, 2018, Kenya was added.

On July 24, 2019, more locations in Nigeria were added.

In October 2022, more locations in Kenya were added. More locations were also added in Senegal and Nigeria . Later in the same month, the first official footage was added for Rwanda was added, this can be only be found in the capital Kigali for now. All four of these countries used a generation four camera to take the footage with.

Click on the Google Street View icon to view a specific location such as a tourist site or landmark.

Reference:

Landmarks in Egypt including Pyramids of Giza , Cairo Citadel , Saqqara , Monastery of Saint Mina , Citadel of Qaitbay and more.

Most cities and roads.

Most roads in Réunion .

Main roads and several cities throughout the country

Samburu National Reserve , Lewa Wildlife Conservancy , parts of Marania Farm near Mount Kenya

Western half of the country: Maseru and major roads.

Landmarks: Avenue of the Baobabs , Rova of Antananarivo

Water views of Barren Isles , Nosy Komba , Sambirano River , Ambalahonko , Velondriake , Avenue of the Baobabs , and the Sacred Forest.

There is a limited street view on just a few roads in the towns of Ambanja , Belo sur Mer and Morondava .

Abuja , Benin City , Enugu , Gwagwalada , Ibadan , Lagos and surroundings and roads between

In Madeira (which geographically belongs to Africa according to geographical definitions : closest mainland), 
most towns, cities, villages, major and rural roads are covered.

In the Azores (which have a location with little more unclear connection to a continent), the islands of São Miguel Island and Terceira Island have good coverage.

In October 2022, Google released official coverage in the capital Kigali , and this adds a new country to Street View. Google used a generation four camera to capture this footage with.

Coverage extends to most towns, cities, villages, major and rural roads on both major islands.

Main roads and several cities throughout the country

The Canary Islands do geographically belong to Africa according to geographical definitions (closest mainland).

Most towns, cities, villages, major and rural roads in the Canary Islands are covered. Ceuta and Melilla have some coverage.

The coastal main road and selected streets in cities along it, including Tunis and Sfax

Uganda got views of most roads inside and around Entebbe and Kampala .

Zimbabwe . Views of some highways and the central business districts of Harare , Chegutu , Rusape , Masvingo and two United Nations World Heritage Sites : Great Zimbabwe National Monument and Victoria Falls . The first instances of Google Street View in Zimbabwe were contributed by photographer Tawanda Kanhema .

Ethiopia Namibia