Groizer X ( Japanese : グロイザーＸ , Hepburn : Guroizā X ) is an anime series aired from 1976 to 1977. There were 36 episodes. It is also referred to as Gloyzer X and Gloizer X .

The Gaira aliens, hidden in the Arctic, plan to conquer Earth. Captured and forced to work for the aliens, Dr. Yan creates the ultimate weapon, a transformable aerial robot called Groizer X. Groizer X was 100 meters tall and weighed 1200 tons. Entrusted to his daughter Rita, Groizer X escapes the clutches of the Gaira and lands in Japan, where pilot Joe Kaisaka meets a wounded Rita. Taking up the controls of Groizer X, Jo and Rita fight against the Gaira invasion.

The anime was created by Go Nagai and Gosaku Ota as a side project during the time they were busy with the various Mazinger series, Groizer X nevertheless managed to be converted into a TV series.  The robot transforms into a jet, while the show included intense battle sequences and aerial combat, it remained a secondary super robot series.

The original Groizer X toyline are one of the very few Super Robot toys produced by Namco instead of the industry dominant Popy .

Yamato then did a GN-U Groizer X figure released in 2007. A manga version of the figure was produced, only painted in green.

While not being a great success in Japan, Groizer X had a considerable impact in Brazil, where it was aired under the name O Pirata do Espaço ("The Space Pirate") in 1984/1986 at the Manchete Network . Only two 70's mecha anime were shown in the country up until that point, and Groizer X was the only one to air in its entirety ( Voltes V , the other one, only aired for five episodes). In Latin America, the anime was aired under the name El Justiciero . In Italy it was one of the few robotic anime to be aired on Silvio Berlusconi 's Canale 5 , in 1981, where it failed to garner much following and was never replayed.

In the 2009 anime Mazinger Edition Z: The Impact! , Count Brocken deploys an updated Groizer, "Groizer X-10" to attack Mazinger Z and the Mazinger Corps. Later on, Groizer's X-9, X-11 and X-12 are also shown, used by the Count to sink the Submarine Fortress Saluud.