HeidiSQL is a free and open-source administration tool for MariaDB , MySQL , as well as Microsoft SQL Server , PostgreSQL and SQLite . Its codebase was originally taken from Ansgar Becker's own MySQL-Front 2.5 software. After selling the MySQL-Front branding to an unrelated party, Becker chose "HeidiSQL" as a replacement. The name was suggested by a friend as a tribute to Heidi Klum , and was further reinforced by Becker's own nostalgia for Heidi, Girl of the Alps .

Ansgar Becker began development on a MySQL front-end in 1999, naming the project "MySQL-Front" and using a direct API layer written by Matthias Fichtner to interface with MySQL servers and the databases contained on them. Private development continued until 2003 with version 2.5.
In 2004, during a period of inactivity, Becker sold the MySQL-Front branding to Nils Hoyer, who continued development by cloning the original software. In April 2006, Becker open-sourced the application on SourceForge , renaming the project "HeidiSQL" due to having sold the MySQL-Front branding. HeidiSQL was re-engineered to use ZeosLib , a newer and more popular database-interface layer, which debuted in version 3.0.
The name was suggested by a friend as a tribute to Heidi Klum , and was further reinforced by Becker's own nostalgia for Heidi, Girl of the Alps .

The database layer was again replaced by a single-unit approach in October 2009 by Becker. Later, this was again extended for supporting other database servers.
jHeidi—a version written in Java was designed to work on Mac and Linux computers—was discontinued in March 2010 in favor of Wine support.
Support for Microsoft SQL Server was added in March 2011 for the 7.0 release.
Since the 8.0 release, HeidiSQL offers its GUI in about 22 languages other than English; translations are contributed by users from various countries via Transifex . PostgreSQL support was introduced in March 2014 for the 9.0 release.
In early 2018, a slightly extended v9.5 release was published on the Microsoft Store . SQLite support was introduced in March 2020 for the 11.0 release.

HeidiSQL has the following GUI features and capabilities: