Human–computer interaction ( HCI ) is research in the design and the use of computer technology , which focuses on the interfaces between people ( users ) and computers . HCI researchers observe the ways humans interact with computers and design technologies that allow humans to interact with computers in novel ways. A device that allows interaction between human being and a computer is known as a " Human-computer Interface (HCI) ".

As a field of research, human–computer interaction is situated at the intersection of computer science , behavioral sciences , design , media studies , and several other fields of study . The term was popularized by Stuart K. Card , Allen Newell , and Thomas P. Moran in their 1983 book, The Psychology of Human–Computer Interaction. The first known use was in 1975 by Carlisle. The term is intended to convey that, unlike other tools with specific and limited uses, computers have many uses which often involve an open-ended dialogue between the user and the computer. The notion of dialogue likens human–computer interaction to human-to-human interaction: an analogy that is crucial to theoretical considerations in the field. ( Full article... )

Computer-supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) is the study of how people utilize technology collaboratively, often towards a shared goal. CSCW addresses how computer systems can support collaborative activity and coordination. More specifically, the field of CSCW seeks to analyze and draw connections between currently understood human psychological and social behaviors and available collaborative tools, or groupware . Often the goal of CSCW is to help promote and utilize technology in a collaborative way, and help create new tools to succeed in that goal. These parallels allow CSCW research to inform future design patterns or assist in the development of entirely new tools. ( Full article... )

Do you have a question about Human–computer interaction that you can't find the answer to?

Consider asking it at the Wikipedia reference desk .

The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject:

Purge server cache