The International Association of Public Transport ( French : Union Internationale des Transports Publics ; UITP ) is a non-profit member-led organisation for public transport authorities, networks and operators, policy decision-makers, scientific institutes and the public transport supply and service industry, that works to advance sustainable urban mobility.

Founded on 17 August 1885, the association is headquartered in Brussels , Belgium , with 13 offices around the world. With more than 1900 members in over 100 countries, UITP advocates for sustainable mobility and produces publications, oversees projects, hosts global events and brings together all those with a vested interested in advancing public transport.

UITP represents an international network of more than 1,900 member companies in over than 100 countries and covers all modes of public transport – metro, light rail, regional and suburban railways, bus, trolleybus, taxi and ride-hailing and waterborne transport. It also represents collective transport in a broader sense, with active committees and working bodies on digitalisation, I.T., sustainable development, design and culture, human resources, transport economics, security and more.

UITP is headquartered in Brussels, Belgium with thirteen regional and liaison offices worldwide, located in Abidjan , Casablanca , Dubai , Hong Kong , Istanbul , Johannesburg , New York , São Paulo , Singapore , Mexico & Central America, New Delhi , and Auckland ).

The General Secretariat is managed by Mohamed Mezghani, who has been working for more than 30 years in public transport and urban mobility related fields and became the association’s Secretary General in January 2018. He previously served in a number of internal positions, including as UITP Deputy Secretary General. His mandate was renewed for a second term, beginning in January 2023.

The President of UITP is Renée Amilcar, the General Manager of OC Transpo in Ottawa, who was voted into office in June 2023 as the association’s first female President. Joining the City of Ottawa as the General Manager in 2021, Renée oversees many projects in her daily role, including the electrification of Ottawa’s transit fleet, and the deployment of 350 zero-emission buses.

Renée’s career in transportation began in 2002 at the Société de transport de Montréal (STM).