47°58′38″N 7°49′36″E ﻿ / ﻿ 47.977318°N 7.826739°E ﻿ / 47.977318; 7.826739

The International Solar Energy Society ( ISES ) is a global organization for promoting the development and utilization of renewable energy . ISES is a UN-accredited NGO headquartered in Freiburg im Breisgau , Germany . Prof. Viktoria Martin is the current president.

ISES was established in 1954 as a global non-profit organization committed to promoting the use of solar energy . Presently, ISES operates in over 110 countries worldwide and boasts a membership that includes scientists, researchers, and individuals from various industries, solar energy associations, as well as other public and private organizations.

ISES also organizes Young ISES , a network of students and young ISES members connecting young solar professionals worldwide.

ISES is a member of the International Renewable Energy Alliance (REN Alliance). The REN Alliance aims to provide the potential for a united voice on renewable energy issues and interests among global leaders in the renewable energy community and respective national and international associations.

Other members include the International Geothermal Association (IGA), the International Hydropower Association (IHA), the World Bioenergy Association (WBA), and the World Wind Energy Association (WWEA).

The International Solar Energy Society (ISES) provides various publications, including the scientific journal Solar Energy, Solar Energy Advances, Renewable Energy Focus, a column in pv magazine and several informative white papers. Additionally, ISES operates an online bookshop that supplies multiple fields by offering conference proceedings, pocket reference books, and more.

The International Solar Energy Society (ISES) maintains a network of national and regional organizations called ISES Sections. These Sections function as platforms for engagement and collaboration at a local level, enabling members to work in different fields. Encouraging involvement with the Sections is a fundamental aspect of ISES's mission, aiming to promote a worldwide community of renewable energy enthusiasts.