Ivan Edward Sutherland (born May 16, 1938) is an American computer scientist and Internet pioneer , widely regarded as a pioneer of computer graphics. His early work in computer graphics as well as his teaching with David C. Evans in that subject at the University of Utah in the 1970s was pioneering in the field. Sutherland, Evans, and their students from that era developed several foundations of modern computer graphics. He received the Turing Award from the Association for Computing Machinery in 1988 for the invention of the Sketchpad , an early predecessor to the sort of graphical user interface that has become ubiquitous in personal computers. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering , as well as the National Academy of Sciences among many other major awards. In 2012, he was awarded the Kyoto Prize in Advanced Technology for "pioneering achievements in the development of computer graphics and interactive interfaces".

Sutherland's father was from New Zealand; his mother, Anne Sutherland, was from Scotland. His family moved to Wilmette, Illinois , then Scarsdale, New York , for his father's career. Bert Sutherland was his elder brother. Ivan Sutherland earned his bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from the Carnegie Institute of Technology , his master's degree from Caltech , and his Ph.D. from MIT in Electrical Engineering in 1963.

Sutherland invented Sketchpad in 1962 while at MIT. Claude Shannon signed on to supervise Sutherland's computer drawing thesis. Among others on his thesis committee were Marvin Minsky and Steven Coons . Sketchpad was an innovative program that influenced alternative forms of interaction with computers. Sketchpad could accept constraints and specified relationships among segments and arcs, including the diameter of arcs. It could draw both horizontal and vertical lines and combine them into figures and shapes. Figures could be copied, moved, rotated, or resized, retaining their basic properties. Sketchpad also had the first window-drawing program and clipping algorithm, which allowed zooming. Sketchpad ran on the Lincoln TX-2 computer.

From 1963 to 1965, after he received his PhD, he served in the U.S. Army, commissioning as an officer through the ROTC program at Carnegie Institute of Technology. As a first lieutenant, Sutherland replaced J. C. R. Licklider as the head of the US Defense Department Advanced Research Project Agency 's Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO), when Licklider took a job at IBM in 1964.

From 1965 to 1968, Sutherland was an associate professor of electrical engineering at Harvard University . Work with student Danny Cohen in 1967 led to the development of the Cohen–Sutherland computer graphics line clipping algorithm. In 1968, with his students Bob Sproull , Quintin Foster, Danny Cohen , and others he created the first head-mounted display that rendered images for the viewer's changing pose, as sensed by The Sword of Damocles , thus making the first virtual reality system. A prior system, Sensorama , used a head-mounted display to play back static video and other sensory stimuli. The optical see-through head-mounted display used in Sutherland's VR system was a stock item used by U.S. military helicopter pilots to view video from cameras mounted on the helicopter's belly.

From 1968 to 1974, Sutherland was a professor at the University of Utah .  Among his students there were Alan Kay , inventor of the Smalltalk language, Gordon W. Romney (computer and cybersecurity scientist), who rendered the first 3D images at U of U, Henri Gouraud , who devised the Gouraud shading technique, Frank Crow , who went on to develop antialiasing methods, Jim Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics , Henry Fuchs , and Edwin Catmull , co-founder of Pixar and now president of Walt Disney and Pixar Animation Studios.

In 1968 he co-founded Evans & Sutherland with his friend and colleague David C. Evans .  The company did pioneering work in the field of real-time hardware, accelerated 3D computer graphics , and printer languages.
Former employees of Evans & Sutherland included the future founders of Adobe ( John Warnock ) and Silicon Graphics ( Jim Clark ).

From 1974 to 1978 he was the Fletcher Jones Professor of Computer Science at California Institute of Technology , where he was the founding head of that school's computer science department.  He then founded a consulting firm, Sutherland, Sproull and Associates, which was purchased in 1990 by Sun Microsystems to form the seed of its research division, Sun Labs.

Sutherland was a fellow and vice president at Sun Microsystems .  Sutherland was a visiting scholar in the computer science division at University of California, Berkeley (fall 2005 – spring 2008). Since 2009, Sutherland and Roncken have led the research in Asynchronous Systems at Portland State University .

1973 "for creative contributions in computer science and computer graphics, particularly in the study of the interfaces between men and machines"

Sutherland has more than 60 patents, including:

On May 28, 2006, Ivan Sutherland married Marly Roncken. He has two children. His elder brother, Bert Sutherland , was also a computer science researcher.