William Joseph Dunlop OBE (25 February 1952 – 2 July 2000) was a Northern Irish motorcyclist from Ballymoney , County Antrim , who was noted for his performances at the Isle of Man TT . In 2015, he was voted Northern Ireland's greatest-ever sports star.

Dunlop lies second on the list of all-time victories at the Isle of Man TT Races behind his nephew, Michael Dunlop . During the course of his career, Dunlop secured a total 26 race wins at the Isle of Man TT, including three hat-tricks, and 24 wins at the Ulster Grand Prix.

He was awarded the MBE in 1986 for his contributions to the sport and the OBE in 1996 for his humanitarian work in Romanian orphanages. After his death, the Joey Dunlop Foundation was established to provide accommodation for disabled visitors to the Isle of Man. Dunlop's legacy includes the "Joey Dunlop Cup," awarded to the most successful rider at the annual TT races, and several memorials and statues in his honour. Dunlop's career was documented in several films.

He won his third hat trick at the Isle of Man TT in 2000 and set his fastest lap on the course of 123.87 mph in the Senior race, which he finished third. In 2016 he was voted through Motorcycle News as the fifth greatest motorcycling icon ever, behind Valentino Rossi . His achievements include three hat-tricks at the Isle of Man TT meeting (1985, 1988 and 2000), where he won a record 26 races in total. A curve at the 26th milestone on the Isle of Man was named in his honour.

Along with Frank Kennedy, Mervyn Robinson and Jim Dunlop, he was one of the " Armoy Armada " quartet of 1970s motorcycle racers from Armoy , County Antrim.

During his career, he won the Ulster Grand Prix 24 times. In 1986, he won a fifth consecutive TT Formula One world title; initially based on one race at the Isle of Man TT after the loss of World Championship status from 1977-onwards and organised by the Auto-Cycle Union , the title was eventually expanded to take in more rounds in other countries.

He was awarded the MBE in 1986 for his services to the sport, and in 1996 he was awarded the OBE for his humanitarian work for children in Romanian orphanages , to which he had delivered clothing and food. Dunlop has featured in documentary films regarding his career: V Four Victory (1983), Joey – The Man Who Conquered the TT (2013) and Road (2014).

Dunlop helped orphans in the Balkans , driving a van loaded with supplies to orphanages in Romania, Albania and Bosnia-Herzegovina before the annual racing season began. In 1996, he received an OBE for his humanitarian work.

After Dunlop's death, the Joey Dunlop Foundation was initiated, a charity that provides appropriate accommodation for disabled visitors to the Isle of Man.

On 30 January 2015, Dunlop was voted Northern Ireland's greatest sports star by readers of the Belfast Telegraph newspaper.

On the night of 23 May 1985, Dunlop was travelling from Northern Ireland to the Isle of Man for the annual TT races by sea, on board the Tornamona , a former fishing boat. The vessel had departed from Strangford , County Down , with Dunlop, other riders, racing bikes and equipment on board. Strong currents into Strangford Lough pushed the Tornamona onto St Patrick's Rock, where her rudder broke off in a crevice. The boat sank and all 13 passengers and crew were rescued by the Portaferry Lifeboat . The bikes were later recovered by divers.

Dunlop married on 22 September 1972 at Ballymoney register office. He was the proprietor of a pub in Ballymoney, and was highly superstitious , always wearing a red T-shirt and his yellow crash helmet when racing. Dunlop was presented with the Freedom of the Borough by Ballymoney Council in 1993.

Dunlop died on 2 July 2000 in Tallinn , Estonia, while leading a 125cc race (he had already won the 750cc and 600cc events) on Pirita-Kose-Kloostrimetsa Circuit . He appeared to lose control of his bike in the wet conditions and died instantly on impact with trees. As a mark of respect, the Estonian government's official website was replaced with a tribute to Dunlop within hours of his death. Northern Ireland television carried live coverage of his funeral. Fifty thousand mourners, including bikers from all parts of Britain and Ireland and people from all backgrounds in Northern Ireland, attended the funeral procession to Garryduff Presbyterian church and his burial in the adjoining graveyard.

The most successful overall rider at the annual TT races is awarded the "Joey Dunlop Cup". A memorial statue was erected in his home town of Ballymoney. On the Isle of Man, a statue of Dunlop astride a Honda overlooks the Bungalow Bend at Snaefell and the 26th Milestone area of the TT course was named "Joey's". A memorial stone was installed at the crash site in Tallinn as well. Irish publishers The O'Brien Press produced a full-colour pictorial tribute to Dunlop following his death. Northern Ireland band Therapy? recorded a song in memory of Dunlop, called Joey ; it appeared on the album Shameless , released in 2001.

Following his death, the Leisure Centre in his hometown of Ballymoney was renamed from the Riada Centre to the Joey Dunlop Leisure Centre. In 2001, the Joey Dunlop Memorial Garden was established in the Dunlop family's hometown, and in 2010 the tribute was extended to include the Robert Dunlop Memorial Garden to honour Joey's late brother, Robert Dunlop . On 26 February 2022, a statue of William Dunlop, son of Robert and nephew of Joey, was added to the Memorial Garden. William died while racing at the Skerries 100 event in 2018.

(Dunlop had 30 points accumulated and was lying 3rd in the championship up until the TT races, however he stopped competing in the championship and still managed to finish 13th in the final championship table.)