The Massachusetts Department of Transportation ( MassDOT ) oversees roads, public transit, aeronautics, and transportation licensing and registration in the US state of Massachusetts .  It was created on November 1, 2009, by the 186th Session of the Massachusetts General Court upon enactment of the 2009 Transportation Reform Act.

In 2009, Governor Deval Patrick proposed merging all Massachusetts transportation agencies into a single Department of Transportation. Legislation consolidating all of Massachusetts' transportation agencies into one organization was signed into law on June 26, 2009.  The newly established Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MASSDOT) assumed operations from the existing conglomeration of state transportation agencies on November 1, 2009.

This change included:

In June 2018, The Boston Globe reported 467 current and former Massachusetts Department of Transportation employees were using the E-ZPass transponders for free. This employee benefit , that has been going on since at least 2009, costs the Massachusetts taxpayers approximately $1 million per year. It is not clear if MassDOT has paid taxes on the benefit or reported it to the Internal Revenue Service , or who would be responsible if a payment to the IRS is required.

As an executive department, the Governor of Massachusetts appoints the state Secretary of Transportation, who is also the "chief executive officer" of the Department.  The governor also appoints a five-person board of directors which approves major decisions.  The Department directly administers some operations, while others remain semi-autonomous.

Formerly an independent state entity, which until 1992 even had its own uniformed police force for vehicular traffic law enforcement, the Registry of Motor Vehicles Division is now directly administered by MassDOT.  It is the equivalent of the Department of Motor Vehicles in most states, and processes driver's licenses and motor vehicle registrations.

All public transportation agencies are administered independently.  However, the DOT board of directors is also the board of directors for the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority , the major provider of public transportation in the Greater Boston area.

The remaining 15 public transit authorities are called Regional Transit Agencies (RTAs), and they provide public bus services in the remainder of the state. The regional transit authorities are:

The regional transit authorities shown in italics above are within MBTA's commuter rail service area, and provide connections to MBTA trains.

DOT retains oversight and statewide planning authority, and also has a Rail section within the Mass Transit Division. Intercity passenger trains are operated by the federally owned Amtrak , and freight rail is privately operated.

MassDOT is a member of the Northeast Corridor Commission .

The Aeronautics Division, formerly the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission, administers state financing of its airports; inspects and licenses airports and landing pads; registers aircraft based in Massachusetts as well as aircraft dealers, regulates airport security, safety, and navigation; and is responsible for statewide aviation planning.  The Department of Transportation does not own any airports; the state-owned airports are controlled by the independent Massachusetts Port Authority (which shares its headquarters with the Aeronautics Division).

Government regulation of aviation in the United States is dominated by the Federal Aviation Administration .  Airline passenger and baggage screening is provided by the federal Transportation Security Administration , but airport security is provided locally.

The 2009 reform law also created within MassDOT:

and outside DOT but supported by it:

The Massachusetts Port Authority (Massport) remains independent from the Department of Transportation, but the Secretary of Transportation serves on the Massport board of directors. Massport owns and operates the maritime Port of Boston, Boston's Logan International Airport , Hanscom Field and Worcester Regional Airport , which was transferred from the City of Worcester in 2010.

The Woods Hole, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket Steamship Authority regulates all ferry services to and from the islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket , and also operates its own passenger, vehicle, and freight ferries.  The Authority has an effective monopoly on car ferry service, but private companies operate various passenger routes.

Transportation funding available to the state and its agencies include:

The statewide budget included $919 million for transportation in FY2009, not including $797M in sales tax revenue dedicated to the MBTA.

Local cities and towns also receive vehicle excise tax revenues, and levy property taxes.  Both state and municipal agencies can levy fines for parking and traffic violations.

Article 78 (LXXVIII) of the Massachusetts Constitution says all motor vehicle fees and taxes (except registration excise tax in lieu of property tax), including fuel taxes, must be spent on transportation, including roads, mass transit, traffic law enforcement, and administration.  Transportation is thus a net recipient of general state funds.

Massachusetts has 10 regional metropolitan planning organizations :

and three non-metropolitan planning organizations covering the remainder of the state:

By law, all federal transportation grants must be allocated by the responsible MPO. Statewide planning and coordination of MPOs is handled by the Department of Transportation.

CTPS is the Central Transportation Planning Staff, which is the staff of the Boston MPO and with which the MBTA contracts for planning assistance.

The Highway Division accepts submissions for projects from its district offices and municipalities.

The Accelerated Bridge Program is a bond bill signed into law by Governor Deval Patrick in August 2008, a year after the I-35W Mississippi River bridge collapse put the state's bridges in the spotlight. The $3 billion, 8-year accelerated bridge program will replace and rehabilitate around 270 bridges statewide. 300–500 additional bridges will be preserved to prevent further deterioration. As of September 1, 2015, the program has reduced the number of structurally deficient bridges to 408, from 543 in 2008.  The program is paid for using bonds in anticipation of future federal transportation grants to be issued to the state.

The MassDOT has called the Accelerated Bridge Program the "Laboratory of Innovation". Engineers on each project are invited to investigate other options to replace the bridges faster and more efficiently to reopen the bridges to traffic faster. Some of these options for the projects are:

As of September 2015, there were 198 active or completed contracts, including replacement or repair of the following bridges (some of which span multiple contracts):