Mobileye Global Inc. is an Israeli autonomous driving company. It is developing self-driving technologies and advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) including cameras, computer chips, and software. Mobileye was acquired by Intel in 2017 and went public again in 2022.

Mobileye was founded in 1999 by Hebrew University professor Amnon Shashua . He evolved his academic research into a vision system that could detect vehicles using a camera and software. It developed into a supplier of automotive safety technologies based on adding "intelligence" to inexpensive cameras for commercialization.

Mobileye established its first research center in 2004. It launched the first generation EyeQ1 processor in 2008. The technology offered driver assistance including automatic emergency braking . One of the first vehicles to use this technology was the fifth-generation BMW 7 Series . Versions of the chip were released in 2010, 2014 and 2018.

In 2013, Mobileye announced the sale of a 25% stake to investors for $400 million, valuing the company at approximately $1.5 billion.

Mobileye went public on the New York Stock Exchange in 2014. It raised $890 million, and became the largest Israeli IPO in U.S. history. By the end of the year, Mobileye's technology had been implemented in 160 car models made by 18 different OEMs.

In 2017, Mobileye unveiled a mathematical model for safe self-driving cars based on research by CEO Amnon Shashua and VP of Technology Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Their study outlined a system called Responsibility-Sensitive Safety (RSS) which redefines fault and caution and could potentially be used to inform insurers and driving laws. Shalev-Shwartz was promoted to CTO in 2019.

In March 2017, Intel announced that it would acquire Mobileye for $15.3 billion — the biggest-ever acquisition of an Israeli tech company. Following the acquisition, Reuters reported that the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission had charged two Israelis, Ariel Darvasi and Amir Waldman, with insider trading prior to the announcement. Both had connections to Mobileye through the Hebrew University of Jerusalem , where Mobileye's technology was first developed. The SEC obtained an emergency court order, freezing certain assets of Virginia residents Lawrence F. Cluff, Jr. and Roger E. Shaoul, who allegedly used insider information to make approximately $1 million on the announcement. Neither Intel nor Mobileye were accused by the SEC of violating the law.

In October 2018, Mobileye and Volkswagen released plans to commercialize Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) in Israel. Mobileye instead began "robotaxi" trials with Nio electric vehicles in Israel in May 2020 due to Volkswagen delays, and unveiled its robotaxi in 2021 at the IAA Mobility show in Munich.

Mobileye demonstrated an autonomous car equipped only with cameras in Jerusalem in January 2020. It later tested the cars in Munich and New York City.

In December 2021, Intel announced its plan to take Mobileye public via in 2022, while maintaining its majority ownership. In October 2022, Intel offered 5–6% of outstanding shares, raising $861 million on 41 million shares. This valued Mobileye at around $17 billion – more than what Intel had paid in 2017. Intel continued to hold all Class B shares, giving itself an overall 99.4% of voting power.

Mobileye formed partnerships with various automakers. Mobileye launched multiple series productions for LDW on GM Cadillac STS and DTS vehicles, and on BMW 5 and 6 Series vehicles. In 2016, Mobileye and Delphi formed a partnership to develop an autonomous driving system. In early 2017, Mobileye announced a partnership with BMW to integrate Mobileye technology into vehicles going to market in 2018. In 2018, Mobileye announced partnerships with BMW, Nissan and Volkswagen. In 2019, Mobileye and NIO announced that they would partner on the development of AVs for consumer markets in China and other major territories. In July 2020, Mobileye and Ford announced a deal in which Mobileye would supply its EyeQ camera-based gear and software across Ford's global product line. Also in 2020, Mobileye partnered with WILLER29 to launch a robotaxi service in Japan , Taiwan and Southeast Asia and with Geely for ADAS. The same year, Intel announced that it had acquired Moovit, a mobility-as-a-service (MaaS) company, to enhance Mobileye's MaaS offering.

In February 2021, Mobileye, Transdev Autonomous Transport System (ATS) and Lohr Group formed a partnership to develop and deploy autonomous shuttles, and in April Mobileye announced a partnership with Udelv on the company's Transporter electric self-driving delivery vehicle. In 2021, Toyota Motor Corp. selected Mobileye and German supplier ZF to develop and supply ADAS and Mobileye began a partnership with Mahindra .

In May 2023, Porsche and Mobileye launched a collaboration to provide Mobileye’s SuperVision™ in future Porsche production models.

In August 2015, Tesla Motors announced that it would incorporate Mobileye's technology in Model S cars. Tesla reportedly did not share its plans with Mobileye, and after the first deadly crash of a self-driving Model S with Autopilot became public in June 2016, Mobileye ended their partnership. The two companies expressed disagreement over what caused the accident, with Shashua claiming that Tesla "was pushing the envelope in terms of safety" and that Autopilot is a "driver assistance system" and not a "driverless system". Mobileye issued a statement that its systems did not recognize a "lateral turn across path".

The EyeQ system-on-chip (SoC) utilizes a single camera sensor to provide passive/active ADAS features including automatic emergency braking (AEB), adaptive cruise control (ACC), lane keeping assist (LKA), traffic jam assist (TJA) and forward collision warning (FCW). Mobileye's fifth-generation EyeQ supports fully autonomous vehicles. More than 27 automobile manufacturers utilize EyeQ for their assisted-driving technologies.

Mobileye's Road Experience Management, or REM, uses real-time data from Mobileye-equipped vehicles to maintain its 3D maps. The data collected amounts to about 10 kilobytes per kilometer. It is compiled in a map called Mobileye RoadBook that leverages anonymized, crowdsourced data from vehicle cameras for navigation and localization. According to Mobileye, REM had mapped more than 7.5 billion kilometers of roads by January 2021.

RSS, or the Responsibility-Sensitive Safety Model, is a mathematical safety model first proposed by Mobileye in 2017. RSS models AV decision-making and digitizes the implicit rules of safe driving for AVs to prevent self-driving vehicles from causing accidents. RSS is defined in software.

True Redundancy is an integrated autonomous driving system that utilizes data streams from 360-surround view cameras, lidar, and radar. This approach adds a lidar/radar subsystem to its computer-vision subsystem for redundancy.

SuperVision uses EyeQ5 SoC data from 11 cameras. The system uses cameras only and is designed for hands-off cars. Geely's Zeekr electric vehicle is equipped with Mobileye SuperVision ADAS and began road trials in 2021.

Mobileye Drive is a Level 4 self-driving system. The sensor suite includes 13 cameras, 3 long-range LiDARs , 6 short-range LiDARs and 6 radars . Mobileye Drive was first fitted to vehicles used for ride-hailing services in 2021, with plans for public testing in Germany and Israel in 2022.

Mobileye Chauffeur is a full-featured hands-off/eyes-off (highway)/hands-off/eyes-on street autonomous driving system. As of August 2023, it was planned for initial release on Polestar 4 .

Mobileye's aftermarket vision-based ADAS systems are based on the same core technology as for production models. These systems offer lane departure warning, forward collision warning, headway monitoring and warning, intelligent headlamp control and speed limit indication (tsr). These systems have been integrated with fleet management systems.

Mobileye created operating system DXP for autonomous vehicles.

It has sales and marketing offices in Midtown, Manhattan , U.S. ; Shanghai , China ; Tokyo , Japan ; and Düsseldorf , Germany .