In computer science, Orfeo Toolbox ( OTB ) is a software library for processing images from Earth observation satellites .

OTB was initiated by the French space agency ( CNES ) in 2006. The software is released under a free licence ; a number of contributors outside CNES are taking part in development and integrating into other projects.

The library was originally targeted at high resolution images acquired by the Orfeo constellation : Pléiades and Cosmo-Skymed , but it also handles other sensors.

OTB provides:

OTB is a C++ library, based on Insight toolkit (ITK). Bindings are developed for Python . A method to use OTB components within IDL / ENVI has been published. One of the OTB user defined a procedure to use the library capabilities from MATLAB .

Since late 2009, some modules are developed as processing plugins for QGIS . Modules for classification, segmentation, hill shading have provided. This effort relies only on volunteers.

OTB algorithms are now available in QGIS through the processing framework Sextante.

Additionally to the library, several applications with GUI are distributed. These application enable interactive segmentation, orthorectification, classification, image registration, etc...

The OTB-Applications package makes available a set of simple software tools . It supports raster and vector data and integrates most of the already existing OTB applications. The architecture takes advantage of the streaming and multi-threading capabilities of the OTB pipeline. It also uses features such as processing on demand and automagic file format I/O. The application is called Monteverdi,

In 2013, Monteverdi software was revamped into a new software called Monteverdi2.

OTB was initially distributed under the French Open Source license CeCILL (similar and compatible with the GNU GPL ) and is now available under the Apache 2.0 license .

The development started in January 2006 with the first release in July 2006. The development version is publicly accessible.

OTB has been presented in major conferences across the five continents

According to statistics on Open Hub , there is a total of 83 contributors and almost 925,000 lines of code (this include many libraries upon which OTB is built).

OTB in also use for the development of the operational ground segment for the VENμS (Vegetation and Environment monitoring on a New Micro Satellite) and the ESA Sentinel-2 missions.