A quantity surveyor ( QS ) is a construction industry professional with expert knowledge on construction costs and contracts .  Qualified professional quantity surveyors can be known as Chartered Surveyors (Members and Fellows of RICS ) in the UK and Certified Quantity Surveyors (a designation of the Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors) in Australia and other countries. In some countries such as Canada, South Africa, Kenya and Mauritius, qualified quantity surveyors are known as Professional Quantity Surveyors, a title protected by law. Due to a shift in the Construction industry and the increased demand for Quantity Surveying expertise, today less importance is being placed on Charterships, with a large % of working Quantity Surveyors practicing with College / University degrees and without membership or fellowship to professional associations.

Quantity surveyors are responsible for managing all aspects of the contractual and financial side of construction projects. They help to ensure that the construction project is completed within its projected budget. Quantity surveyors are also hired by contractors to help with the valuation of construction work for the contractor, help with bidding and project budgeting, and the submission of bills to the client.

The duties of a quantity surveyor are as follows:

A university degree or diploma alone does not allow one to register as a Chartered Quantity Surveyor. Usually, anyone looking to qualify as a Chartered Quantity Surveyor, Certified Quantity Surveyor must hold appropriate educational qualifications and work experience, and must pass a professional competence assessment.

The RICS requires an RICS approved degree, several years of practical experience, and passing the Assessment of Professional Competence (APC) to qualify as a Chartered Quantity Surveyor. Some candidates may be entitled to qualify through extensive experience and reciprocity agreements.

As construction projects become increasingly complex, the demand for skilled quantity surveyors continues to grow. The importance of Quantity Surveyors becoming Chartered is lessening year on year, with more and more businesses opting to hire staff with a standard Quantity Surveying degree and develop Quantity Surveying skills through their own training programmes. The future of quantity surveying lies in embracing digitalization, automation, and sustainable practices. Quantity surveyors will play a pivotal role in managing costs, optimizing resources, and ensuring the financial success of construction projects.