Sabily ( Arabic : سبيلي , IPA: [sæˈbiːliː] , My Way ) is a discontinued Linux distribution based on Ubuntu , designed by and with the intent to be used by followers of Islam . Originally named Ubuntu Muslim Edition (presented as UbuntuME) , development for Sabily was active from 2007 to 2011.

Sabily was designed for Muslim users to have out-of-the-box Arabic language support and Islamic software and tools installed, including a prayer times tool, a Qur'an study tool, Hijri calendar , etc.

The Unity shell is based on GNOME 3 on Sabily 11.10, Unity 2D for graphic cards without 3D capabilities. The Unity shell became available on the Sabily 11.04 Badr DVD. Ubuntu Classic Desktop was the default desktop in Sabily (11.04), but Unity in Ubuntu 11.04. The full version of Sabily comes with out-of-the-box educational software, and codecs for most commonly used media formats.

Sabily followed the release schedule of Ubuntu. After Ubuntu 9.04, its name was changed from UbuntuME, to Sabily.

There are currently three versions of Sabily, but there is no official host at the moment.

The Ultimate version is useful mainly when not connected to the Internet, yet all Sabily versions provide online Qur'an recitations.

Sabily is available as a Live DVD , which can be booted on the host computer without installation. The Wisabi installer can install Sabily to the hard disk within Microsoft Windows , without involving risky formatting or partitioning .

As compared to Ubuntu:

Zekr is an open platform Quran study tool for browsing and researching on the Quran. Recitations and translations are available for download.

Small version DVD available online recitations:

Minbar indicates the time when Muslims should pray. It runs in background as a tray icon and plays the athan (call to prayer) at prayer times. Minbar works with the main calculation methods, such as Muslim League (default), Shafii, and Hanafi. Muslims observe salat five times a day, and Minbar helps to remind the user of daily prayer times.

Monajat is an application for Linux and Windows that displays Azkar messages. It runs in the background as a tray icon and displays hadiths . The application is an application provided by the Sabily community.

Zakat Calc is an application for Linux. Zakat , or almsgiving, is one of the Five Pillars of Islam , is the giving of 2.5% of one's possessions (surplus wealth) to charity, generally to the poor and needy. Zakat Calc helps Muslims to calculate zakat types: gold, silver, stones, jewels, savings in bank, property, loans, business, firms, animals (2.5%) and agriculture (10%). It was created using the Gambas programming language and it runs on Linux.

Gnome Nanny (parental control) is an easy way to control how long users or children can be on the computer and what they can and cannot access browsing the web.