A second screen involves the use of a computing device to provide a different viewing experience for content on another device.

The term commonly refers to the use of such devices to provide interactive features, like posts on social media platforms that take input from the audience during a broadcast, such as a television program . This type of technology is designed to keep the audience engaged with whatever they are watching and has been found to support social television and generate an online conversation around specific content. It is a type of screen casting technology that allows a smartphone or tablet to display its contents on another screen. A second screen can also refer to having multiple monitors connected to a computer.

Several studies show a tendency to use another device while watching television such as a tablet or smartphone . Other studies distinguish a higher percentage of comments or posts on social networks about the content that is being watched ( Nielsen ratings ).

Besides keeping the audience engaged (via polling, chatting, providing additional information about content and participants, etc.) and generating revenue via advertising, a second screen can be used as a metering solution to get information about the audience. Being more far-reaching and inexpensive, a second screen may replace people meters in the future.

One trend hampering the growth of second screens is that many shows are creating their own applications for them. It is considered impractical to expect users to download multiple applications and switch between them for each channel or show.

Conference and business meeting organizers may also incorporate second screens to deepen audience engagement. According to "2014 Trend Tracker", the second screen phenomenon is a significant and growing trend. "Attendees are so glued to their devices, even while watching a live presentation (or at home, on television) that marketers are supplying them with a simultaneous engagement tool they can access on that device," says Robin Stanley, VP-design and creative at GES. "Software tools allow conference session presenters to share slides and presentations in real-time, so attendees can follow on with their device in hand." Second screen technology at conferences can be an integral part of the event experience by allowing conference attendees to engage with the speaker and other participants.

Many applications designed for the second screen give another form of interactivity to the user and another way to sell advertising content. Second screening may also involve applications not formally connected to the primary entertainment. Some examples include:

Sports broadcasters , to stem the flight of the audience away from watching the main screen (the television) to the second screen , are offering alternative content to the main program, such as unseen moments, alternative information, soundtracks, and characters. Proposed new technologies allow the viewer to see different camera angles while watching the game.

TV2 (Denmark) , Denmark 's largest commercial TV channel, synchronized its Second Screen service with the live broadcast of the Giro d'Italia cycling race from May 5 to May 27, 2012. Viewers on all internet devices could get rider stats, biographies, news, stage reviews, city information, weather updates, and more. Viewers scanned a QR code on the TV broadcast to get connected or typed in a short URL .

In the US , HDNet Fights utilizes a second screen service that synchronizes with live MMA broadcasts. Viewers on smartphones and tablets can get stats, vote on fights and rounds, chat, win prizes, and see how fellow second screen users voted on fight outcomes.

Slate described popular procedural dramas like Suits as examples of "'second-screen content'—shows that don't require viewers to hit rewind if they idly drift off while scrolling their phones". John Landgraf of FX Networks bragged that, by contrast, Shogun was "not a two-screen show".