Semi-metro (also known as a subway–surface line or a hybrid streetcar / light rail line) is a form of public rail transport in which trams run partly on a conflict-free track, by using tunnels and viaducts . These stretches of track are designed to function like a regular metro or rapid transit line. Semi-metro lines run with tram cars because they are usually developed from an existing tram network.

One key difference from metro lines (rapid transit) is that semi-metro lines only partially run in tunnels and on viaducts. A metro line has an entirely conflict-free track, often completely grade separated. Semi-metro routes are operated by regular trams (with or without low floor) or with specially developed tramcars (light rail vehicles), such as the Stadtbahn-car 'type B' .

The semi-metro sits between rapid transit (with higher investments and a higher capacity and speed) and buses and tram in city streets (with lower investments and a lower capacity and speed). It combines advantages of greater speed (from rapid transit) with a better coverage in suburban areas (from busses and trams). The term semi-metro falls under the umbrella term light rail , which includes many kinds of modern tram transport. Semi-metro is in itself a container concept in which premetro and Stadtbahn fall. Although cheaper than a metro line, the construction of infrastructure for semi-metro routes was often still too expensive. Therefore sections were sometimes not constructed or realised in phases. The entanglement with the existing tram network is an advantage compared to constructing a separate light metro line. Often several tram branches at grade are needed in order to make fully use of the high capacity tunnels.

A rail transit system is firstly determined by its main right-of-way category and secondly by other parameters like power supply and operating speed. There are three major right-of-way categories, having been labelled A, B and C. Category A: independent right-of-way, without level road or pedestrian crossings resulting in conflict free sections. Catergory B: reserved right-of-way to avoid traffic congestion, but with level road or pedestrian crossings. Category C: street running lines in mixed traffic. Typically, a tram/streetcar line has mostly category C, a light rail line has mostly category B and a semi-metro line has some of category A (combined with category B and sometimes C). Whenever light rail vehicles operate only using category A, it is defined as Light rail rapid transit (LRRT) and is part of the greater light metro class.

The first city in Europe to carry a portion of a streetcar line through the city center in a tunnel was Marseille , France , in 1893, with its Noailles subterranean station (see Marseille tramway ). It was initially operated by horse-drawn wagons. A prominent example is the Tremont Street subway (1897) in Boston , today part of the MBTA Green Line . Brussels, Cologne and Frankfurt pioneered in Europe in the 1960s.

Besides regular semi-metro networks, two subtypes exist. Both terms refer to tram networks where tram vehicles use viaducts and/or run through tunnels under city centres, but with key differences:

Premetro is largely similar to semi-metro: a type of public transport in which trams run partly grade separated, by using tunnels and/or viaducts. However, there is one clear distinguishing factor: premetro uses infrastructure that has been explicitly constructed with the ambition to transfer to use metro trains in the future. It is usually also developed from an existing classic tram network. One prominent example is the premetro in Brussels, where several premetro lines have been or will be converted into full heavy rail metro lines.

The U-Stadtbahn is also an intermediate transportation form between metro and tram. It has originated in Germany, adapting the existing tram networks. Here specially developed trams run underground through tunnels in central urban areas. Stadtbahn lines can be subdivided by looking at the types of rolling stock.

There are many regions with forms of light rail, but only few where light rail uses tunnels and/or viaducts. In the United States, the most prominent examples are the San Francisco Muni Metro and Green Line in Boston. The Buffalo Metro Rail , Seattle's Link light rail and the light rail lines in Cleveland are also considered semi-metro.

Notable examples in Germany are the Hanover Stadtbahn , Essen Stadtbahn , Bonn and Cologne Stadtbahns, and the Frankfurt tramways . In the United Kingdom, the Tyne and Wear Metro is by definition a semi-metro system due to eight level crossings. Over several decades a semi-metro system was constructed in the Dutch city of The Hague .

More recent examples are the Madrid Metro Ligero , the Málaga Metro and Alicante Metropolitan-Tram in Spain and the Porto Metro in Portugal.