A shuttle bus is a bus that travels a shorter route in comparison to most bus routes. Typically, shuttle buses travel in both directions between two points. Shuttle buses are designed to transport large groups of people who are all travelling to and from a specific destination in a more organized manner. Shuttle buses can be used on several occasions, such as transporting university students or used as a method to transport people from airports to hotels.

Airport buses , airport shuttles , and airport shuttle buses are buses that travel between the airport and a city centre. These buses mainly travel to major transit hubs, however, they may also travel directly to major hotels around the city. Buses that travel directly to the city are sometimes referred to as hotel shuttles .

University shuttles are buses that travel between the campus area and may sometimes serve major transport hubs and railway stations. University shuttles operate within larger campuses that may not allow public road access. These shuttles cut down transportation times between two ends of the campus and allow students to travel safely during the night through dark places. University shuttles also tend to operate out of regular operational hours for regular bus services.

Rail replacement buses are buses that operate when a particular train line is not operating. These services are run by the railway company and often serve a number of stations along the railway line.

Employee shuttles are buses used to transport employees between their homes and workplaces, these shuttles also may be used to transport people within workplaces. These employee shuttles provide benefits such as easing the daily commutes of workers. Many employers are also using employee shuttle buses as an alternative to personal cars to reduce emissions produced by the company and their employees. During the end of COVID-19, many people were accustomed to working at home, as a result many companies began to use employee shuttles as a tool to bring people back into the workplace.

Community transport (British English) or paratransit (North American English) are shuttle buses designed to transport those with disabilities and other people who are struggling to get around. Community transit is often designed to be accessible for those in wheelchairs by offering additional features that may not always be present on regular buses. These extra features include special equipment, ramps, and additional wheelchair areas.

In Australia, shuttle buses are used to transport students from transport hubs (such as train stations or bus stations) to their universities.

In Melbourne, several of these operate: the most used is Route 601, which transports students from Huntingdale station to Monash University, Clayton campus .

In Brisbane, the most popular shuttle is route 134, which transports students from Queen Street bus station via Griffith University Mount Gravatt campus to Griffith University Nathan campus .

Typically, these university shuttles are express and will only serve education precincts or major stops along the route. These buses also tend to have a special livery showing what university they serve.

Shuttle buses in Australia may also be used to connect airports to city centres: for instance Melbourne's Skybus connects Melbourne Airport to Southern Cross Station in Melbourne's CBD . The Kinetic subsidiary also operates airport shuttles in several cities across Australia, such as Hobart .

In France, shuttle buses are commonly used to connect airports and their respective city centres; the most used of these is the Roissy bus service between Charles de Gaulle Airport and central Paris. This operates from Terminal 2 at Charles de Gaulle Airport to Opéra Station on the Paris Métro .

In the UK, shuttle buses operate at airports as well as connecting universities to local areas. One example of this is the Hotel Hoppa service that travels from Heathrow Airport to several nearby hotels. In the UK, there are also many shuttle buses that serve and their nearby area campuses. For example, Oxford Bus Company operates the science transit shuttle: there are two routes which connect the city centre and the railway station with various destinations used by science students.

In the US, shuttle buses transport users from airports and city centres. One of the most used of these is the FlyAway bus service connecting Los Angeles and Los Angeles International Airport , this service connects Union Station (Los Angeles) with Los Angeles International Airport.

In Mexico, the transportation infrastructure is robust and diverse, with shuttle buses playing a significant role. These vehicles provide a crucial link between airports and urban centers, facilitating the movement of passengers across various destinations. A notable instance of this dynamic is observed at Cancun International Airport . The shuttle service at Cancun International Airport is critical to the region’s transportation ecosystem. It offers connections to several key locations, including Cancun , Playa del Carmen , and Tulum . This service exemplifies the integration of transportation networks within the country, contributing to the accessibility and mobility of residents and tourists alike.

In Kyiv, Ukraine, there is a short temporary shuttle bus route no. 60, connecting the Lybidska station and the Demiivska station, from where the shuttle train is available to the Teremky station. This bus was launched in the first place due to the flood between two Kyiv Metro stations.

Several other shuttle bus routes are available in Ukrainian cities.