Silicon Laboratories, Inc. , commonly referred to as Silicon Labs , is a fabless global technology company that designs and manufactures semiconductors , other silicon devices and software , which it sells to electronics design engineers and manufacturers in Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure worldwide.

It is headquartered in Austin , Texas, United States. The company focuses on microcontrollers (MCUs) and wireless system on chips (SoCs) and modules. The company also produces software stacks including firmware libraries and protocol-based software, and a free software development platform called Simplicity Studio.

Silicon Labs was founded in 1996 and two years later released its first product, an updated DAA design that enabled manufacturers to reduce the size and cost of a modem. During its first three years, the company focused on RF and CMOS integration, and developed the world's first CMOS RF synthesizer for mobile phones which was released in 1999. Following the appointment of Tyson Tuttle as the CEO in 2012, Silicon Labs has increasingly focused on developing technologies for the IoT market, which in 2019 accounted for more than 50 percent of the company's revenue, but in 2020 had increased to about 58 percent.

In August 2019, Silicon Labs had more than 1,770 patents worldwide issued or pending.

Silicon Labs was founded by Crystal Semiconductor (now owned by Cirrus Logic Inc. ) alumni Nav Sooch, Dave Welland and Jeff Scott in 1996. It became a publicly traded company in 2000. The first product, an updated DAA design, was released in the market in 1998. It cost significantly less than traditional DAAs and used less space compared to established products, which made it an instant success, taking the company's sales from $5.6 million in 1998 to nearly $47 million in 1999.

During its early years, the company focused on developing an improved RF synthesizer for mobile phones that would cost less and take up less space. It introduced its first RF Chip in late 1999.

Since 2012, Silicon Labs has been increasingly focused on developing technologies for the evolving IoT market. On April 22, 2021, Silicon Labs announced the sale of its infrastructure and automotive business to Skyworks Solutions Inc for $2.75 billion. The deal was closed on July 26, 2021.

In July 2021, it was announced that Tyson Tuttle would be stepping down as CEO. In January 2022 former president, Matt Johnson, completed the transition into the CEO position.

Silicon Labs provides semiconductor products for use in a variety of connected devices. The company also provides development kits and software including Simplicity Studio , an integrated development environment for IoT connected device applications.

'Silicon Labs' portfolio is built around the Internet of Things (IoT) focus area, primarily focused on home and life and industrial and commercial wireless applications.

Silicon Labs’ product portfolio is protected by a range of security measures:

Anti-rollback prevention

Cryptographic accelerator

Differential Power Analysis (DPA) countermeasures

Protected secret key storage

Public Key Infrastructure

Secure boot

Secure debug with lock/unlock

Secure link

Secure programming at manufacturing

Secure Vault

True Random Number Generator

Silicon Labs technologies support seven wireless protocols.

Bluetooth

Bluetooth software enables developers to utilize Bluetooth LE, Bluetooth 5, Bluetooth 5.1, Bluetooth 5.2, and Bluetooth mesh. Bluetooth SDK can be used to create standalone Bluetooth applications for Wireless Gecko SoCs or modules, or network co-processor (NCP) applications. Products include:

Proprietary wireless protocols

Devices cover sub-GHz and 2.4 GHz frequencies, delivering ultra-low power, long range, up to 20dBm output power and different modulation schemes for major frequency bands. Products include:

Thread

Technologies that enabling IP connectivity through self-healing mesh features, native IPv6 based connectivity and different security options. Products include:

Zigbee

Software stacks and development tools for Zigbee applications, including Mesh Networking SoCs and modules.

Z-Wave

Modules and SoCs for applications in sectors including smart home, hospitality and MDUs, where sensors and battery-operated devices require long range and low power.

Wi-Fi

Wi-Fi SoCs and modules designed for applications requiring low power and good RF performance, such as IoT. Products include:

Wi-SUN

Wi-SUN (Wireless Smart Ubiquitous Network) is a field area network (FAN) to enable long-distance connectivity. The Wi-SUN technology aims to simplify LPWAN deployment and enable secure wireless connectivity in applications including advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), street lighting networks, asset management, and parking, air quality, and waste management sensors.

Matter

Matter is a global IoT connectivity standard that builds on top of existing IP-connectivity protocols to enable cross-platform IoT communication, encompassing end products, mobile applications, and cloud services. Silicon Labs wireless devices are available for the development of Matter end products that support Thread, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth protocols.

Amazon Sidewalk

Amazon Sidewalk is a low-bandwidth, long-range wireless communication protocol developed by Amazon. It uses Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) for short distance communication,[2] and 900 MHz CSS and FSK for longer distances.

Silicon Labs is a founding member of both the ZigBee Alliance and the Thread Group , and is on the Board of Directors at the Wi-SUN Alliance.

The company is also a member of the Bluetooth Special Interest Group , Wi-Fi Alliance , Z-Wave Alliance and a Gold member of the Open Connectivity Foundation and the RISC-V Foundation .

Silicon Labs is headquartered in Austin , Texas , with regional offices in Boston , Massachusetts and San Jose , California . The company has also corporate offices in Montreal , Canada ; Copenhagen , Denmark ; Espoo , Finland ; Budapest , Hungary ; Oslo , Norway and Singapore .

It has 15 sales offices across the world. These include Boston and San Jose in the US; Beijing , Shanghai , Shenzhen and Wuhan in China ; Espoo , Finland ; Montigny-le-Bretonneux , France ; Munich , Germany ; Milan , Italy ; Tokyo , Japan ; Seoul , South Korea ; Singapore ; Taipei , Taiwan ; and Camberley , the UK .

Silicon Labs has a wireless development center in Hyderabad , India .