Animal-free agriculture , also known as plant agriculture , plant-based agriculture , veganic agriculture , stockfree farming , plant farming or veganic farming , consists of farming methods that do not use animals or animal products .

Animal-free growers do not keep domesticated animals and do not use animal products such as farmed animal manures or animal parts ( bone meal , blood meal , fish meal ) to fertilize their crops. Emphasis is placed on using green manures and plant-based compost instead.

Animal-free farming may use organic or non-organic farming methods. However, most detailed discussions of animal-free agriculture currently focus on animal-free organic variants. In the European Union, farmers have a financial incentive to use manure instead of animal-free fertilisers, since manure is subsidised. However, organic manure is not subsidised.

Industrial agriculture with synthetic fertilizers is animal-free. In the United States, few industrial farms use manure. Of all U.S. cropland, only 5% was manured in 2006.

Vegan organic farming methods do not use animal products or by-products, such as blood meal, fish products, bone meal, feces , or other animal-origin matter because the production of these materials is viewed as either harming animals directly, or as associated with the exploitation and consequent suffering of animals. Some of these materials are by-products of animal husbandry , created during the process of cultivating animals for the production of meat , milk , skins, furs , entertainment, labor, or companionship. The sale of such by-products decreases expenses and increases profit for those engaged in animal husbandry and therefore helps support the animal husbandry industry, an outcome vegans find unacceptable.

Vegan organic growers maintain soil fertility using green manures , cover crops , green wastes , composted vegetable matter, and minerals . Some vegan gardeners may supplement this with human urine from vegans (which provides nitrogen ) and ' humanure ' from vegans, produced from compost toilets .

Veganic organic farmers take measures such as refraining from making large disturbances in the soil of the land and cultivating a variety of plants in the ground. This form of farming "encompasses a respect for the animals, the environment, and human health." Some of the plant-based techniques used in veganic agriculture include mulch , compost , chipped branched wood , crop rotation and others.

Farms certified as biocyclic vegan use preventative methods to manage insects. If these fail, however, the label allows them to use insecticides such as Bacillus thuringiensis , which starves larvae to death.

Vegan organic farming is much less common than organic farming. In 2019, there were 63 self-declared vegan organic farms in the United States, and 16,585 certified organic farms.

Livestock in the United States produce 230,000 pounds of manure per second, and nitrogen from these wastes is converted into ammonia and nitrates which leach into ground and surface water causing contamination of wells, rivers and streams. Mature compost of plant-based origins, used in animal-free agriculture, can reduce leaching of nitrate which leads to an improvement in groundwater quality and counteracts the eutrophication of surface waters.

Animal free agriculture has the potential to prevent illnesses like influenza from spreading. Experts agree that most strains of the influenza virus that infect human beings came from contact with other animals. Farm animals on factory farms may be genetically similar therefore making them more susceptible to specific parasites. Infection among animals is more easily spread because of their close proximity to one another. Animal-free agriculture does not contribute to the spread of influenza through animals.

Vegan France Interpro in collaboration with the Biocyclic Vegan Network created an interactive map that lists all-vegan organic projects across Europe. This list primarily includes agricultural operations but also trading and processing companies, online shops, network organizations as well as certification bodies that certify farms according to the Biocyclic Vegan Standard.

There is a similar map in North America that conducts the same concept and locates vegan farms around North America.

The Biocyclic Vegan Standard is an IFOAM -accredited organic standard for vegan organic farms. It is awarded by BNS Biocyclic Network Services Ltd (a Cypriot company), and has accredited 19 farms in Europe as of June 2021 . The German Environment Agency awarded the German biocyclic vegan association some 60,000 euros for the promotion of the biocyclic vegan standard from 2021 to 2022.

As of June 2021 , 18 farms in the United Kingdom and Ireland are certified vegan organic by the Stockfree Organic label. Farms wanting to obtain the label are certified by the Soil Association , and the label's requirements are determined by the Vegan Organic Network.