Telecommunication , often used in its plural form or abbreviated as telecom , is the transmission of information with an immediacy comparable to face-to-face communication. As such, slow communications technologies like postal mail and pneumatic tubes are excluded from the definition. Many transmission media have been used for telecommunications throughout history, from smoke signals , beacons , semaphore telegraphs , signal flags , and optical heliographs to wires and empty space made to carry electromagnetic signals. These paths of transmission may be divided into communication channels for multiplexing , allowing for a single medium to transmit several concurrent communication sessions . Several methods of long-distance communication before the modern era used sounds like coded drumbeats , the blowing of horns , and whistles . Long-distance technologies invented during the 20th and 21st centuries generally use electric power, and include the telegraph , telephone , television , and radio .

Early telecommunication networks used metal wires as the medium for transmitting signals. These networks were used for telegraphy and telephony for many decades. In the first decade of the 20th century, a revolution in wireless communication began with breakthroughs including those made in radio communications by Guglielmo Marconi , who won the 1909 Nobel Prize in Physics . Other early pioneers in electrical and electronic telecommunications include co-inventors of the telegraph Charles Wheatstone and Samuel Morse , numerous inventors and developers of the telephone including Antonio Meucci and Alexander Graham Bell , inventors of radio Edwin Armstrong and Lee de Forest , as well as inventors of television like Vladimir K. Zworykin , John Logie Baird and Philo Farnsworth .

Since the 1960s, the proliferation of digital technologies has meant that voice communications have gradually been supplemented by data. The physical limitations of metallic media prompted the development of optical fibre. The Internet , a technology independent of any given medium, has provided global access to services for individual users and further reduced location and time limitations on communications. ( Full article... )

Transatlantic telegraph cables were undersea cables running under the Atlantic Ocean for telegraph communications.  Telegraphy is an obsolete form of communication, and the cables have long since been decommissioned, but telephone and data are still carried on other transatlantic telecommunications cables .

The Atlantic Telegraph Company led by Cyrus West Field constructed the first transatlantic telegraph cable.  The project began in 1854 with the first cable laid from Valentia Island off the west coast of Ireland to Bay of Bulls , Trinity Bay , Newfoundland .  The first communications occurred on August 16, 1858, but the line speed was poor. The first official telegram to pass between two continents that day was a letter of congratulations from Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom to President of the United States James Buchanan .  Signal quality declined rapidly, slowing transmission to an almost unusable speed.  The cable was destroyed after three weeks when Wildman Whitehouse applied excessive voltage to it while trying to achieve faster operation.  It has been argued that the cable's faulty manufacture, storage and handling would have caused its premature failure in any case.  Its short life undermined public and investor confidence and delayed efforts to restore a connection. ( Full article... )

Antonio Santi Giuseppe Meucci ( / m eɪ ˈ uː tʃ i / may- OO -chee , Italian: [anˈtɔːnjo meˈuttʃi] ; 13 April 1808 – 18 October 1889) was an Italian inventor and an associate of Giuseppe Garibaldi , a major political figure in the history of Italy. Meucci is best known for developing a voice-communication apparatus that several sources credit as the first telephone .

Meucci set up a form of voice-communication link in his Staten Island , New York , home that connected the second-floor bedroom to his laboratory. He submitted a patent caveat for his telephonic device to the U.S. Patent Office in 1871, but there was no mention of electromagnetic transmission of vocal sound in his caveat. In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was granted a patent for the electromagnetic transmission of vocal sound by undulatory electric current. Despite the longstanding general crediting of Bell with the accomplishment, the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities supported celebrations of Meucci's 200th birthday in 2008 using the title "Inventore del telefono" (Inventor of the telephone). The U.S. House of Representatives in a resolution in 2002 also acknowledged Meucci's work in the invention of the telephone, although the U.S. Senate did not join the resolution and the interpretation of the resolution is disputed. ( Full article... )

The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject:

Purge server cache