This is a timeline of first orbital launches by country . While a number of countries, incl. Canada , Australia , Germany , Brazil , Algeria , Kazakhstan , Turkey , Argentina , Italy , Malaysia , Poland , South Africa , the Philippines , Egypt , Spain , Mexico , Thailand and Chile , have built or launched satellites , as of 2022, eleven countries , incl. the United States , Japan , China , India , Iran , Israel , France , the United Kingdom and South Korea , have had the capability to send objects into orbit with their own launch vehicles . Russia and Ukraine inherited the capability of the space launchers and satellites from the Soviet Union , following its dissolution in 1991 . Russia launches its rockets from its own and foreign ( Kazakh ) spaceports .

Ukraine launched only from foreign (Kazakh and Russian) launch facilities until 2015, after which political differences with Russia effectively halted Ukraine's ability to produce orbital rockets. France became a space power independently, launching a payload into orbit from Algeria, before joining space launcher facilities in the multi-national Ariane project. The United Kingdom became a space power independently following a single payload insertion into orbit from Australia.

Ten countries and one inter-governmental organisation ( ESA ) have a proven orbital launch capability, as of November 2021 . Three countries (France, Italy and the United Kingdom) formerly had such an independent capability. In all cases where a country has conducted independent human spaceflights (as of 2021, three — China, the Soviet Union/Russia, and the United States), these launches were preceded by independent uncrewed launch capability.

The race to launch the first satellite was closely contested by the Soviet Union and the United States, and was the beginning of the Space Race . The launching of satellites, while still contributing to national prestige, is a significant economic activity as well, with public and private rocket systems competing for launches, using cost and reliability as selling points.

Countries like Italy are not included since they have not yet developed an orbital rocket from scratch; i.e., an orbital rocket that was designed and engineered in its entirety in the country in question.

Two countries, Italy and New Zealand , have contributed in the creation or continuation of orbital launch systems.

The above list includes confirmed satellite launches with rockets produced by the launching country, like Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany, India, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom or the United States. Lists with differing criteria might include the following launches:

Some countries have no self-developed rocket systems, but have provided their spaceports for launches of their own and foreign satellites on foreign launchers:

Many other countries , such as Mexico , Poland , Chile , Japan and India , launched their own satellites on one of the foreign launchers listed above, the first being British owned and operated; American-built satellite Ariel 1 , which was launched by a US rocket in April 1962. In September 1962, the Canadian satellite, Alouette-1 , was launched by a US rocket, but unlike Ariel 1, it was constructed by Canada.