Torque steer is the unintended influence of engine torque on the steering , especially in front-wheel-drive vehicles. For example, during heavy acceleration, the steering may pull to one side, which may be disturbing to the driver. The effect is manifested either as a tugging sensation in the steering wheel, or a veering of the vehicle from the intended path. Torque steer is directly related to differences in the forces in the contact patches of the left and right drive wheels . The effect becomes more evident when high torques are applied to the drive wheels because of a high overall reduction ratio between the engine and wheels, high engine torque, or some combination of the two. Torque steer is distinct from steering kickback .

Root causes for torque steer are:

Asymmetric driveshaft angles due to any combination of

The problems associated with unequal-length driveshafts are endemic to the transverse engine layout combined with an end-mounted transmission unit; some manufacturers have mitigated this completely by mounting the engine longitudinally but still driving the front wheels—this indeed was the solution adopted on the earliest front-wheel-drive Citroens. Early Renault front-driven models such as the R4 , R5 Phase I, R12 , R18 and certain R21 models also adopted this layout, as does Audi to the present day in its midsize models upward. The key disadvantage is packaging; in the case of Audi, which mounts the power unit ahead of the front axle line, handling is compromised by front-heavy weight distribution. This configuration does however facilitate the easy addition of all-wheel drive ; Subaru also uses the overhung longitudinal engine for the same reason, but mitigates the problem of an unbalanced center of gravity by using a "flat-four" boxer engine . Renault, on the other hand, placed the engine behind the front axle line, but this compromises interior packaging since it forces the engine towards the firewall.

Rear-wheel-drive vehicles still are affected by torque steer in the sense that any of the above situations will still apply a steering moment to the car (though from the rear wheels instead of the front). However, the torque-steer effect at the rear wheels will not send any torque response back through the steering column, so the driver will not have to fight the steering wheel.