Transit police (also known as transport police , railway police , railroad police and several other terms) are specialized police agencies employed either by a common carrier , such as a transit district , railway , railroad , bus line , or another mass transit provider or municipality , county , district, or state .

Transit law enforcement services may also be provided by a specialized unit within a larger local law enforcement agency. Their mandate is generally to prevent and investigate all crime committed against the carrier or its passengers and crime incidentally committed on or around the carrier's property.

A transit police force may consist of officers employed directly by a transit system or by a government agency dedicated to providing specialized law enforcement services.  There are numerous instances of both within United States , given the decentralized nature of US law enforcement; examples of larger, stand-alone agencies within the US include the MBTA Police , BART Police , and the New Jersey Transit Police Department . In the United Kingdom , transit law enforcement is provided by a single, nation-wide agency, the British Transport Police , although other law enforcement agencies may assist with this task. Within India , many transit policing services are conducted by the Government Railway Police .

Other forces may exist as a specialized unit of a local law enforcement agency, such as the United States' Transit Police Services Bureau of the Orange County, California Sheriff's Department (which serves the Orange County Transportation Authority ) or the Transit Enforcement Unit of the Phoenix Police Department (assigned to the Phoenix Public Transit Department ). Some formerly independent transit police agencies have also been absorbed into (or had their duties assumed by) a larger, local law enforcement agency; Examples include the LACMTA Police's duties being assumed by the LAPD Transit Services Division and the New York City Transit Police being integrated into the NYPD Transit Bureau .

Where the term "transit police" is used for a law enforcement agency or unit working for a railroad/railway, it usually refers to a railroad providing urban mass transit (such as a city-elevated system or subway ) as opposed to long-distance rail carriage.

Law enforcement agencies of both cargo railroads and long-haul rail carriers are usually referred to as " railroad police " or "railway police". There is often considerable overlap in transit police and railroad police agencies’ duties. Railroad police agencies, however, have a long history, and were established separate from and prior to most modern transit police agencies. Transit police and railroad police powers may also be legally defined separately; For example, in the United States, many states have separate laws concerning both types of agencies.

However, in modern times, with increasing overlap in duties and the proliferation of extensive mass transit systems, some jurisdictions have opted for a hybrid model of railroad and transit policing. For instance, in the United Kingdom , most of the rail systems, including the London Underground , are policed by the British Transport Police (BTP). The BTP is a full-service, national law enforcement agency, which essentially combined the duties of dozens of now-defunct transit and railway police agencies into a single entity (the BTP has no authority in Northern Ireland , except in emergencies).

Some transit police forces have full policing powers, such as the US' BART Police , SEPTA 's Transit Police, Metro Transit Police Department , Utah Transit Authority Police Department or the MBTA Police . The UK's British Transport Police , also has full police powers within Great Britain . In some areas, transit police agencies have limited or specific powers, and may be classed as special police or special constables , or peace officers with limited powers, such as Canada 's Edmonton Transit Peace Officers. Regardless, transit police services nearly always hold more authority than un-sworn, security guard-only services.

Some of the crimes transit police and railroad police investigate include trespassing on the right-of-way of a railroad, assaults against passengers, tagging of graffiti on railroad rolling stock and buses or bus stops , pickpocketing , ticket fraud , robbery and theft of personal belongings, baggage or freight , and drug dealing at transit stations. They may also engage in random ticket checking hoping to catch and fine ticketless travelers. These controls are usually more frequent in transit systems using an honor-based fare collecting approach .

In federal states like the United States , Canada , or Australia , federal and state statutes determine the jurisdiction and authority of all police departments, including transit police.

Most transit police services have the same police authority as any other national, state and local police agencies, such as the MBTA Transit Police Department , MARTA (Atlanta) Transit Police , British Transport Police , New Jersey Transit Police Department , BART Police , Maryland Transit Administration Police , DART Police, SEPTA Transit Police , Utah Transit Authority Police Department , and the Metro Vancouver Transit Police ( South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Police Service ). Some agencies have rather extensive jurisdictions, including traffic enforcement and arrest powers on and off property, for example, the New Jersey Transit Police Department maintains the distinction of being the only transit police agency in the United States with statewide authority.

New South Wales

Queensland

South Australia

Victoria

Western Australia

There are two transit police agencies in Canada: the Metro Vancouver Transit Police , a provincially-regulated "designated policing unit" within TransLink , the transit authority for the Metro Vancouver Regional District in British Columbia ; and the Via Rail Police Service , a federally-regulated railway police force operated by Via Rail , the provider of intercity rail service for all of Canada. There are also two other federally-regulated railway police services serving the country's two largest freight railways, the Canadian National Railway and Canadian Pacific Kansas City .

In Alberta , Manitoba , Ontario , and Quebec , large transit systems maintain special constabularies , a type of unarmed police force, to provide safety and law enforcement services on transit property. These agencies have authority over transit by-laws and provincial legislation; the Criminal Code of Canada in Ontario and Quebec; and their officers variously have the ability to use emergency vehicles with sirens (in Alberta, parts of Ontario, and Quebec) and carry a baton, handcuffs, and pepper spray or gel (in all four provinces).

Cities in China which have rapid transit systems all have their transit police force associated to the local public security bureau . There are no non-governmental police forces, or police institutes under transit authority. National Rail used to have a police force under the Ministry of Railways , but such authority has since been transferred to local police agencies.

However, the structure of institutions can be vary from city to city. For example, cities like Tianjin and Chengdu might have a joint public transportation force of division level, operates on all the taxis, bus routes, coaches, rapid transit and ferry lines as well as transportation hubs inside city limit; while Chongqing and Xi'an have tighter transit cop brigades focused exclusively on protecting the mass transit lines. Again, all these agencies are supervised by the PSBs of higher level.

The Railway Protection Force is a security force, established by the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 ; enacted by the Parliament of India for "the better protection and security of railway property ". The force is under the authority of the Ministry of Railways .

It has the power to search, arrest, investigate and prosecute, though the ultimate power rests in the hands of the Government Railway Police .

The Government Railway Police ( IAST : Sarakārī Rēlvē Pulīs ), abbreviated as GRP , is the police force of the respective state governments, tasked with policing on railways and their premises. It operates under the respective state police forces. It was established by the Railways Act, 1989 , of the Parliament of India. Its duties correspond to those of the District Police in the areas under their jurisdiction, such as patrolling and prevention and detection of crimes but only on railway property. It is the parent agency of the Railway Protection Force (RPF), and aids and provides assistance to it, whose primary duties are to protect and secure all railway property.

The GRP's responsibility is to observe law and order on all railway property. Officers are recruited from the Indian Police Service (IPS) and State Police Services (SPS). The force is under control of the police departments of the various State Police Services (SPS) in liaison with Ministry of Railways .

Railway Security Guard : Armed security forces protecting railway system in Poland

Main Directorate of the Transport of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. (Главное Управление на Транспорте Министерства Внутренних Дел.)